A MANUAL OF
ADVERSE DRUG
INTERACTIONS

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

A MANUAL OF

ADVERSE DRUG
INTERACTIONS
J P GRIFFIN
BSc, PhD, MB BS, FRCP, FRCPath, FFPM
Director, John Grifin Associates Ltd
Honorary Consultant Clinical Pharmacologist, Lister Hospital, Stevenage,
Her tfordshire
Formerly Director, Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry,
Whitehall, London
Formerly Professional Head of the Medicines Division,
Department of Health, London

P F D’ARCY
OBE, BPharm, PhD, DSc, DSc (Hon), FRPharmS, CChem, FRSC, FPSNI
Emeritus Professor of Pharmacy in The Queenís University of Belfast,
Northern Ireland

1997
ELSEVIER
Amsterdam - Lausanne - New York - Oxford - Shannon - Singapore - Tokyo

01997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior written
permission of the Publisher, Elsevier Science B.V., Copyright and Permissions Department, P.O. Box
521, 1000 AM Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
No responsibility is assumed by the Publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a
matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods,
products, instructions or ideas contained in the material herein. Because of the rapid advances in the
medical sciences, the Publisher recommends that independent verification of diagnoses and drug dosages
should be made.

Special regulations for readers in the USA This publication has been registered with the Copyright
Clearance Center Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. Information can be obtained
from the CCC about conditions under which the photocopying of parts of this publication may be made
in the USA. All other copyright questions, including photocopying outside thc USA, should be referred
to the copyright owner, Elsevier Science B.V. unless otherwise specified.
This book is printed on acid free paper.

First Edition (Wright, Bristol), 1975
Japanese Edition, 1978
Second Edition (Wright, Bristol), 1979
German Edition, 1981
Third Edition (Wright, Bristol), 1984
German Second Edition, 1987
Fourth Edition (Wright, Bristol), 1988

ISBN: 0 444 82406 5
G r i f f l n . J. P . (John P a r r y )
A manual o f a d v e r s e d r u g i n t e r a c t i o n s 1 J.P. G r l f f i n . P . F . D ' a r c y .
5 t h ed.
p.
cm.
I n c l u d e s b i b l I o g r a p h i c a l r e f e r e n c e s and i n d e x .
ISBN 0 - 4 4 4 - 8 2 4 0 6 - 5
1 . Drugs--Side effects--Handbooks. manuals. e t c .
I . D ' A r c y . P.
F . ( P a t r l c k F r a n c l s ) 11. T i t l e .
[DNLM, 1 . D r u g I n t e r a c t i o n s - - h a n d b o o k s .
2 . Drug Therapy--adverse
OV 3 9 G851n 1 9 9 7 1
effects--handbooks.
RM302.5.G74 1997
615'.7045--dc21
DNLM/DLC
f o r L l b r a r y o f Congress
97-8345
CIP

--

Published by:
Elsevier Science B.V.
P.O. Box 211
1000 AE Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Printed in The Netherlands

FOREWORD
For twenty years this book, now in its Fifth edition, has provided information on
adverse drug interactions that is unrivalled in coverage and scholarship. Adverse
drug reactions, many of them ascribable to interactions with other drugs or with
chemical substances in food or the environment, are thought to cause or complicate
one in twenty of hospital admissions and are thus responsible for much human
misery and cost. They pose a problem worldwide even in those countries with the
most careful and vigilant regulatory authorities and are an important - if often
overlooked - cause of preventable morbidity and mortality. Paradoxically, awareness of adverse drug reactions and interactions amongst doctors is heightened in
those countries with more conservative prescribing habits as opposed to those with
a more liberal approach to polypharmacy and extensive drug use.
Better monitoring, especially at local level, has identified many of these adverse
reactions and pharmacoepidemiology is a well established discipline in medical
science. Systematic surveys and reviews and study of linkage data together with
fundamental pharmacogenetics yield ever more accurate predictive indices for reducing hazard.
If safety in drug use is to improve, education of prescribers is vitally important.
This book with its up-to-date and coordinated approach, serves that purpose well.
The real threat, as the authors remind us, is the ignorance of practitioners not drug
interaction itself, for most adverse effects can be reversed speedily if recognized.

HURLEY
Professor Dame ROSALINDE
DBE, LLB, MD, D Univ, FRCPath, FRCOG, FFPM
Barrister, Inner Temple

V

PREFACE TO FIFTH EDITION
The objective of this book was stated in the preface to the 1st Edition, to present
in a readily accessible and understandable form the major drug interactions that
are likely to be encountered in practical therapeutics. This still remains the aim of
the 5th Edition.
Between the publication of the 4th Edition and the preparation of the 5th Edition
there have been very significant changes in the treatment of a number of conditions.
For example, for nearly 25 years prior to the last edition there had been only the
introduction of one new antiepileptic agent, sodium valproate, but since the last
edition some eight new agents have been introduced into the therapeutic armamentarium. This is not an isolated example. We have therefore taken the opportunity to rewrite completely and to reformat the book to the extent that it is almost
a totally new work.
Just before the 1st Edition was published in 1975, a Lancet Editorial (19th April
1975) said that “the publication of huge lists and tables will induce in doctors a
drug-interaction anxiety syndrome and lead to therapeutic paralysis”. We were
persuaded to expect better things of our colleagues and envisaged that few would
turn into “paralysed medical ostriches” as a result of this or any other book. We
believed that a better awareness of possible hazards of medication and possible
interactions between drugs by those who use them - doctors, pharmacists and
patients - can only result in safer and more effective therapeutics. We have,
however, been concerned by the development of “Therapeutic Conservatism” in
which doctors have been shown to be reluctant to prescribe newer and often more
effective, safer and more pharmacoeconomically efficient medicines. This has been
due to the Government’s downward pressure on medicines’ expenditure rather than
concerns for the safety of these more recently introduced treatments.
We have been concerned that paracetamol has been licensed with a built-in antidote,
methionine. It is undesirable that patients taking paracetamol should be exposed
to high doses of a substance for which for the most part they have no need, and
which is itself not free of risk, Methimine has been shown to interact with a variety
of substances including oral contraceptives and to destabilize controlled diabetics.
As a general principle such blanket preventative measures are to be depreciated.
The withdrawal of a paracetamol/methionine combination by one major manufacturer is to be applauded. The real issue of whether it should have been approved
for marketing in the first place is a mute point.

J. P. GRIFFIN
Digswell
Hertfordshire

P. F. D’ARCY
Lisburn
Co. Antrim

vi

PREFACE TO FOURTH EDITION
In the preparation of this edition we are pleased to welcome Dr Chris Speirs as a
co-author.
It is becoming very clear that the literature in the field of interactions is also
requiring some judgemental element to be exercised as to its clinical significance
when therapeutic judgements are being made. We have attempted to do this by
indicating by the boldness of typeface the relative importance that should be given
to various reports. We are also aware that there are drawbacks to this approach
since, rarely, for some unfortunate individuals a reaction may have unexpected
severity; for them such interactions are therefore very significant. It is because of
this awareness that we have not excluded reference to some usually clinically
unimportant interactions.
Finally, we would wish to reiterate the warnings we gave in the preface to the Third
Edition regarding the increasing level of medicolegal litigation and have therefore
taken the step of reproducing the Preface to the Third Edition.

J. P. GRIFFIN
Digswell
Herts

P. F. D’ARCY
Holywood
Co. Down

vii

C. J. SPEIRS
Fetcham
Surrey

PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION
At the time of completion of this third edition the Medical Defence Union’s Annual
Report for 1982 was available and to us, as authors of a book on drug interactions,
it made interesting reading.
One case settled for 244 000 was due to phenylbutazone-induced potentiation of
warfarin, which was followed by an intraspinal haemorrhage resulting in an incomplete tetraplegia at the level of C7.
A second case was of a 64-year-old man with a history of cervical spondylosis,
hypertension and previous myocardial infarction who attended his general practitioner complaining of pain and numbness in his left wrist and fingers. The doctor
diagnosed tenosynovitis and prescribed phenylbutazone. Ten days later the patient
was admitted to hospital with severe neurological abnormalities. These were subsequently shown to be due to haemorrhage into the spinal cord. The patient had been
on long-term anticoagulants and the phenylbutazone had potentiated their effect.
The notes held by the general practitioner had the words ‘on anticoagulants’ written
on the folder but when a new folder had been used, this information had not been
transferred to it. This case was also settled for 244 000.
One suspects that in the future as patients become more litigation conscious, more
claims for drug-induced injury due to drug interaction will be initiated. In the
Medical Defence Union’s Annual Report for 1982 they discuss this current trend
in increased litigation and ask why more claims? Why are damages much higher?
The answer is that litigation is easier with increased opportunities to gain legal aid,
wages are higher and reimbursement for lost earnings is also higher.
It is interesting that in the first case the solicitor’s letter stated that ‘Butazolidin is
a well known potentiator of coumarin anticoagulants of which warfarin is one’ . . .
‘the prescribing of Butazolidin for a patient known to be taking warfarin routinely
was a breach of your professional duty to him’.
It is clear from the tone of these and other recent cases that ignorance of drug
interactions is likely to result in high financial reimbursement to those that suffer
injury. When doctors are prescribing their principle should be ‘do not use two if
one will do’.
J. P. GRIFFIN
Digswell
Herts

...

Vlll

P. F. D’ARCY
Holywood
Co. Down

PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION
The object of this book is to present in a readily accessible and easily understandable
form the major drug interactions that are likely to be encountered in practical
therapeutics, and to draw attention to some theoretical interactions that could be
serious or life threatening. The book is intended as a convenient desk reference
book for the prescribing physician and the pharmacist.
A Lancet Editorial (19 April 1975) said that ‘publication of huge lists and tables
will induce in doctors a drug-interaction-anxiety syndrome and lead to therapeutic
paralysis’. We are persuaded better things of our colleagues and envisage few will
turn into paralysed medical ostriches as a result of this or any other book on the
potential hazards of drug therapy. We believe that awareness of possible hazards
of medication and possible interactions between drugs on the part of those who use
them, both doctors and pharmacists, can only result in better therapeutics with
benefit to the patient in terms of both safety and efficacy.

J. P. GRIFFIN
Digswell
Herts

P. F. D’ARCY
Helen’s Bay
Co. Down

ix

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to all those who have assisted us in any way in the production of
any of the editions of this book. New editions, to a greater or lesser extent, are
built on the experience gained in the production of earlier editions. In the 4th
Edition we made a comprehensive acknowledgement to all those who assisted in
any way. The 5th Edition has been a total rewrite and we are therefore only going
to acknowledge here those who have made a specific contribution to this edition.
During the past few years one or other of us have published extensive articles in
Adverse Drug Reactions and Toxicological Reviews. These papers have formed the
basis of Chapters 4.2, 4.4, 13 and 15. We wish to thank Oxford University Press
for permission to use extensively material that appeared in the following articles:
D’Arcy PF and Griffin JP (1995) Interactions with drugs used in the treatment of
depressive illness. Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 14, 211-231.
D’Arcy PF (1995) Nutrient drug interactions. Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 14,
233-254.
D’Arcy PF (1996) Drug interactions with medicinal plastics. Adverse Drug React
Toxicol Rev 15, 207-219.
Griffin JP (1996) Drug interactions with agents used in the treatment of epilepsy.
Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 15, 221-246.
We would therefore like to thank the publishers and the typesetter for their skills
and assistance, the Library staff at the Royal Society of Medicine and the staff of
the Medical Library of The Queen’s University of Belfast, colleagues who have
assisted in providing advice in the preparation of certain changes, namely Professor
Alan Richens of Cardiff and Dr Rashmi Shah of the Medicines Control Agency.
We would also thank Mrs Elspeth Gladwin for expert secretarial assistance. Above
all we are indebted to our respective wives for their long sufferings while this and
previous editions have consumed much of our time.

X

CONTENTS

Foreword by Professor Dame Rosalinde Hurley

V

Preface

vi

Acknowledgements

X

Part 1. Commentary on Drug Interactions and their Mechanisms
Introduction: A widening problem
A . Pharmacokinetic drug interactions
1. Drug-drug and nutrient-drug interactions at the
absorption site
2. Drug interactions at plasma and tissue binding sites
3. Drug interactions and drug-metabolizing enzymes
4. Interactions involving renal excretory mechanisms

B . Pharmacodynamic drug interactions
5. Drug-drug interactions at the receptor and other active
sites
6. Drug interactions in vitro
7. Age and genetic factors
8. Herbal and other non-orthodox remedies
9. Interference with laboratory testing
References to Part 1
Part 2. Drug Interaction Tables

11
13

25
29
37
39
43
53
65
69
73
81

Chapter 1. Drug interactions with agents used to treat gastrointestinal
disease
Section I. Inter'actions with agents used to treat peptic
ulceration and other gastrointestinal disorders
Section 11. Drugs affecting gastrointestinal motility
Section 111. Drugs used to treat inflammatory bowel
diseases

xi

83
85
101
105

xii

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Chapter 2. Drug interactions with agents used in the treatment of
cardiovascular disease
2.1. Interactions with cardiac drugs
2.2. Interactions with drugs used to treat hypertension
2.3. Drugs interactions with anticoagulants and fibrinolytic
agents
2.4. Drug interactions with lipid lowering agents
2.5. Diuretics

209
217

Chapter 3. Drug interactions with agents used in respiratory disease
3.1. Interactions with sympathomimetic amines
3.2. Interactions with theophylline and derivatives
3.3. Antihistamines

233
235
247
265

Chapter 4. Drug interactions with agents used in the treatment of CNS
disorders
4.1. Interactions with drugs used in the treatment of
schizophrenia and related psychoses
4.2. Interactions with drugs used in the treatment of
depressive illness
4.3. Drug interactions with lithium salts
4.4. Agents used in the treatment of epilepsy
4.5. Interactions with drugs used in the treatment of
parkinsonism
Chapter 5. Drug interactions with antimicrobial agents
5.1. Aminoglycosides
5.2. Cephalosporins and related p-lactam antibiotics
5.3. Chloramphenicol and thiamphenicol
5.4. Clindamycin
5.5. Fusidic acid
5.6. Glycopeptide antibiotics
5.7. Imidazole antibacterials
5.8. Macrolide antibiotics
5.9. Nitrofurans
5.10. Penicillins
5.11. Polymyxins
5.12. 4-Quinolones
5.13. Sulphonamides
5.14. Tetracyclines
5.15. Trimethoprim
5.16. Antituberculous agents
5.17. Antifungal agents
5.18. Antiviral agents

111
113
147
177

279
28 1
297
321
333
363
373
373
376
377
379
379
379
380
382
384
384
386
387
388
390
392
393
397
400

...

CONTENTS X l l l

Chapter 6. Drug interactions with agents used to treat endocrine
disorders
6.1. Drugs used in diabetes
6.2. Interactions with corticosteroids
6.3. Interactions with drugs used in the treatment and
prevention of osteoporosis

409
411
429
435

Chapter 7. Drug interactions with oral contraceptives

439

Chapter 8. Drug interactions with agents used in immunosuppression
and cancer chemotherapy
8.1. Drug interactions with immunosuppressants
8.2. Drug interactions with antineoplastic agents

453
455
467

Chapter 9. Drug interactions with aspirin and other non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory agents
9.1. Aspirin
9.2. Other NSAIDs

485
487
493

Chapter 10. Drug interactions with vaccines and interferons

507

Chapter 11. Drug interactions with agents used in anaesthesia
11.1. Drug interactions with local anaesthetics
11.2. Skeletal muscle relaxants

515
517
525

Chapter 12. Drug interactions with herbal remedies

537

Chapter 13. Drug interactions with medicinal plastics

549

Chapter 14. Drug interactions with alcohol

563

Chapter 15. Nutrient-drug interactions

573

Chapter 16. Recent and unconfirmed drug interactions

585

Annex 1

595

Index

611

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

PART 1
Commentary on Drug Interactions
and Their Mechanisms

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

INTRODUCTION: A WIDENING PROBLEM
Over 20 years ago, an editorial on drug interactions in the Lancet (19 April 1975)
said that the “publication of huge lists and tables will induce in doctors a druginteraction-anxiety syndrome and lead to therapeutic paralysis”. This prediction has
not come about, although the problem of drug interactions is still with us and the
spectrum is widening as new drugs are introduced. Indeed it could be said that the
nature of the problem has also widened for in the intervening years drug interactions
have come to embrace interactions with food and with herbal medicines as well as
the more numerous and better recognized drug-drug interactions.
There is little doubt that drug-drug interactions can often be serious, even lifethreatening. They can also be very expensive, and evidence from the Medical
Defence Unions’ Reports of over 10 years ago reveals that one case which settled
for &44000 was due to phenylbutazone-induced potentiation of warfarin which was
followed by an intraspinal haemorrhage resulting in an incomplete tetraplegia at
the level of C7. It is interesting in this case that the solicitor’s letter stated that
“Butazolidin is a well known potentiator of coumarin anticoagulants of which
warfarin is one” . . . “the prescribing of Butazolidin for a patient known to be
taking warfarin routinely was a breach of your professional duty to him”.
Knowledge of the ‘state of the art’ has much advanced since the 1980s and what
were then novel and scientifically interesting interactions are now established and
well-recorded interactions in standard books of reference. Knowledge has advanced
but there has been little progress in the way in which it is generated.

SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Most reports of drug-drug- or drug-food interaction arise primarily from experience
in the clinic. Some of these are anecdotal and may not be reported again, whilst
others represent the first warning signs of a wider cohort of cases that is yet to be
realised. Their purpose is to report the interaction and explain its hazard so that
others can avoid it occurring; however, few of these reports are able to indicate
the precise mechanism of the interaction.
Generally, animal experiments have not contributed much of substance to knowledge about interactions. Admittedly, the early work of Conney and his associates
(1956, 1957) in rats did much to explore the nature and organization of enzyme
systems in liver microsomes, but it was the human studies of Levy (1970) and
Neuvonen et al., (1970) that provided the now classical evidence that the salts of
divalent or trivalent metals formed non-absorbable complexes with tetracyclines
and reduced their absorption, resulting in sub-therapeutic levels in the plasma. It

4 A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS
was observation in patients that gave the first indication that concomitant medication
could antagonize the efficacy of oral contraceptives (Dossetor, 1975). It was in
tuberculosis patients that the apparent interaction between PAS and rifampicin was
first recognized and later to be explained that the interaction was not due to PAS
but to the bentonite content of its granules (Boman et al., 1971). One of us (PFD’A)
was reminded of this latter interaction in recent months when a lady in Belfast who
had been a TB patient at that time and had been receiving rifampicin and PAS,
mentioned that without warning or explanation her treatment had been changed to
rifampicin plus isoniazid.
One of the advantages of the attention that has been focused on adverse drug
interactions over the past 20 years or so is that many drug-drug and drug-food
interactions are now predictable and many of the unwanted consequences of using
drug combinations can be avoided by simply adjusting the dosage of one or more
of the interactants. As a result of this, there has been a considerable improvement
in the safety and efficacy of therapy with drug combinations.
However, the focus on drug interactions has always been more on their hazards
than their advantages. This is the correct orientation since the vast majority of
interactions are hazardous. An awareness of the possible hazards of medication and
possible interactions between drugs on the part of those who use them, doctors and
other health professionals, can only result in better therapy with benefit to the
patient in terms of both safety and efficacy. Many excellent publications have
explored the nature of drug interactions and their message has filtered down to the
patient level being expressed by the maxim ‘do not use two drugs when one will
do’.

THE LITERATURE ON DRUG INTERACTIONS
The literature on drug interactions tends to be very non-specific and in the last 20
years or so it has become voluminous and has been cluttered up with a sticky mass
of largely irrelevant studies of interactions in animal models and in single-dose
pharmacokinetic studies in animals and in young adult age groups of volunteers.
Such studies can be of predictive value, but only if they mimic the clinical situation
and if they relate to drug combinations and dosage regimens that are normally used
in sick patients.
It is clear that the literature requires some judgmental element to be exercized
as to its clinical significance, It is the single reports in the correspondence columns
of medical and pharmaceutical journals that, although often anecdotal and uncorroborated, have, in our view, made a major contribution to elucidating the nature
and extent of interactions. Such reports are also useful since they often stimulate
other clinicians to report similar experiences in their own patients.
There is still need to focus attention on those drug-drug or drug-nutrient interactions that really do influence the safety of efficacy of human drug therapy in all age
groups. If mechanisms of interaction are clearly understood then it may be possible
to develop animal/biochemical/tissue culture/physico-chemical or other types of

INTRODUCTION

5

models of interactions to which new molecules could be exposed during their
development stages. It is hardly satisfactory or safe to have to rely on patients
experiencing adverse interactions before they can be established and documented.
It is hoped that by discussing mechanisms of interactions, this volume will stimulate
interest in investigating the possibility and potential of developing meaningful
models.
Whereas over the years books, our own included, have classified and detailed
drug-drug interactions into their respective categories (Fig.l), they have not been
so expressive about the individual mechanisms that underlie these interactions.
Their prime objective was to inform about the interaction and its clinical management.
In our preliminary thoughts and discussions in the planning of this book, we
decided to forego mention of theoretical interactions with minor and relatively
unimportant drugs and attempt to produce a volume that dealt specifically with
those drugs that have major clinical use in the United Kingdom. The number of
these is not as great as one might think. There are in fact a total of just 50 drugs
that come into this category (Tables l a , lb). We have therefore concentrated our
attention on drugs that are actually taken by patients and their interactions with
other medication or foodstuffs.
In recent years there has been intensive research into the mechanisms of established drug-drug interactions in man. We have therefore decided to give details

0

D o @

ORAL ROUTE
altered
bioavailability

PLASMA
drug COmpetitiM for
protein binding sites

I

DRUS IYlfRACTIOI
drug or food modifies
dlorption characteristics
of anothw drug

drug induced modified
excretory mechanism8

/

t

passive
reabsorption
pH. pKa effects

rug competition

induction or Inhibition

of rnetaholic enzyme systems

Or

antaponism

Fig. 1. Sites of drug-drug and drug-food interactions.

active reabsorption
competition for
tubular secretion

6

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table l a . TOP 50 ACTIVE INGREDIENTS BY INN NAME PRESENTED IN RANK ORDER BY NUMBER OF UK PRESCRIPTIONS IN 1994*

1. Salbutamol
2. Beclomethasone
3. Amoxycillin
4. Acetylsalicylic acid
5 . Atenolol
6. Nifedipine
7. Paracetamol
8. Ibuprofen
9. Bendroflumethiazide
10. Temazepam
11. Levothyroxine
12. Diclofenac
13. Ranitidine
14. Frusemide (furosemide)
15. Lactulose
16. Prednisolone
17. Digoxin
18. Isosorbide mononitrate
19. Penicillin V
20. Erythromycin
21, Nitroglycerin
22. Omeprazole
23. Dothiepin
24. Hydrocortisone
25. Influenza vaccine

26. Cimetidine
27. Plantago ovata
28. Diazepam
29. Betamethasone
30. Enalapril
31. Propranolol
32. Terfenadine
33. Chloramphenicol
34. Trimethoprim
35. Amitriptyline
36. Clotrimazole
37. Nitrazepam
38. Naproxen
39. Ferrous iron
40. Budesonide
41. Captopril
42. Cromoglycate
43. Warfarin
44. Diltiazem
45. Quinine
46. Lisinopril
47. Terbutaline
48. Flucloxacillin
49. Carbamazepine
50. Oxytetracycline

*Source: Griffin (1995).

Table l b . TOP 50 ACTIVE INGREDIENTSBY INN NAME PRESENTZD IN RANK ORDER BY NUMBER OF UK PATIENTS
EXPOSED IN 1994*

1. Amoxycillin
2. Salbutamol
3. Beclomethasone
4. Ibuprofen
5. Influenza vaccine
6. Penicillin V
7. Erythromycin
8. Paracetamol
9. Chloramphenicol
10. Trimethopnm
11. Hydrocortisone
12. Diclofenac
13. Clotrimazole
14. Terfenadine
15. Flucloxacillin
16. Betamethasone
17. Acetysalicylic acid
18. Prednisolone
19. Bendroflumethiazide
20. Tetanus vaccine
21. Atenolol
22. Lactulose
23. Oxytetracycline
24. Ranitidine
25. Temazepam
*Source: Griffin (1995).

26. Cefalexin
27. Naproxen
28. Cromoglycate
29. Nefedipine
30. Nitroglycerin
31. Cimetidine
32. Prochlorperazine
33. Hepatitis A vaccine (inactivated virus)
34. Plantago ovata
35. Pseudoephedrine
36. Frusemide (furosemide)
37. Omeprazole
38. Fusidic acid
39. Doxycycline
40. Typhoid vaccine
41. Ferrous iron
42. Levothyroxine
43, Dothiepin
44. Diazepam
45. Metronidazole
46. Terbutaline
47. Propranolol
48. Budesonide
49. Paraffin oil
50. Norethisterone

INTRODUCTION

7

about mechanisms of interaction in Part 1 of this book. Of necessity this has had
to be brief, a more detailed account of mechanisms of drug interactions has been
given in a recent and companion volume (D’Arcy et al., 1996). It is convenient
within this context to classify these introductory discussions on mechanisms into
two major parts: firstly, those involved in pharmacokinetic drug interactions and
secondly, those involved in pharmacodynamic drug interactions.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

A. Pharmacokinetic drug Interactions

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

1. DRUG-DRUG AND NUTRIENT-DRUG
INTERACTIONS AT THE
ABSORPTION SITE
There are many facets of drug-drug interactions at the absorption site. For the
majority of drugs this is the stomach and small intestine. The influence of wideranging factors, such as the effect of fluid volume of gastrointestinal physiology,
splanchnic blood flow, passive diffusion, gastric emptying time, pH of the intestinal
contents, intestinal motility, ionic content of foods, dietary fat, and gastrointestinal
disease can have considerable effect on the absorption of drugs and they are
mechanisms common to both drug-drug and drug-food interactions in the gut. An
excellent review on drug interactions in the gastrointestinal tract has recently been
published by Lipka et al. (1996) and this, together with a companion review on
drug-food interactions affecting drug absorption by Welling (1996), presents a
synopsis of current knowledge in this field.
The two topics of drug-food interactions affecting drug absorption and the effect
of drugs on food and nutrient absorption are closely related but quite distinct. In
this present volume only the former topic is addressed. No attempt has been made
to discuss the latter topic; material on this latter topic has been reviewed elsewhere
(Basu, 1988; Roe, 1989; Trovato et al., 1991; D’Arcy, 1995).
It is only in relatively recent years that studies on food-drug interactions have
been actively pursued. This work was heralded by the major review of Welling
(1977). It is surprising that the study of drug-food interactions should have lagged
behind that of drug-drug interactions. It is noticeable that food-drug interactions
are not as often reported as drug-drug interactions although their potential frequency is far greater since food is by far the most common substance associated with
the ingestion of oral doses of medicine. In our experience, medical and pharmacy
practitioners are not well informed about food-drug interactions and therefore may
fail to pass on cautionary advice to their patients.
Perhaps one of the most troublesome and well reported of food-drug interactions
was the interaction between tyramine-containing foods and MAOI-antidepressants
during the early 1960s (see reviews by D’Arcy, 1979; Brown et al., 1989; Lippman
and Nash, 1990). Deaths from eating cheese whilst taking MAOIs was given great
publicity and this type of interaction did much to create an awareness of the
potential of foods to interact with medicines.
Monoamine oxidase type A preferentially oxidatively de-aminates adrenaline,
noradrenaline and serotonin, while type B preferentially metabolizes benzylamine
and phenylethylamine. Dopamine and tyramine are de-aminated by both forms of

11

12

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

the enzyme. The traditional monoamine oxidase inhibitors, such as phenelzine and
tranylcypromine inhibit both types A and B of the enzyme. Selective MA01 inhibitors, like brofaromine, moclobemide and clorgyline have been introduced with a
selective and reversible inhibition of monoamine oxidase (type A), and selegiline,
which reversibly inhibits type B, is an adjunct in the treatment of parkinsonism.
The dietary restrictions that need to be observed with the traditional MAOIs (type
A and B) are much less stringent with the new selective inhibitors.
It was largely the interactions with food that led to a virtual replacement of the
use of MA01 antidepressants by the tri- and polycyclic antidepressants. That this
may have been a collective error of judgement is now being realized; perhaps the
MAOIs are not so bad after all!
The effect of heavy metal ions in milk and other dairy products on the absorption
of tetracyclines was another milestone which raised the sensibility of clinicians to
the dangers of food-drug interactions (Braybrooks et al., 1975; Chin and Lach,
1975; Neuvonen et al., 1970).
It took almost 20 years of tetracycline usage before the milk-tetracycline interaction was fully recognized. Once this interaction was realized, it was only a relatively
short time before the spectrum of such interactions was widened and it was realized
that it was not uncommon that the absorption from the gut of other antimicrobial
agents, or reduction of their bioavailability, could be seriously influenced by food
or metal ions.
Even more recent work has shown that the bisphosphonates, used to treat a broad
range of bone disorders, including osteolytic bone metastases, hyperparathyroidism,
Pagets disease of bone and established vertebral osteoporosis in women, can be
completely antagonized by food and vitamin-mineral supplements with a high calcium content (Fogelman et al., 1984, 1985, 1986; Fels et al., 1989; Compston,
1994). Much of the study of bisphosphonates on bones have been reviewed in the
comprehensive book edited by Bijvoet et al. (1995).

2. DRUG INTERACTIONS AT PLASMA
AND TISSUE BINDING SITES
The importance of plasma protein-binding displacement as a clinically important
drug interaction mechanism is controversial. When a displacing agent interacts with
a primary drug the result is an increase in the free concentration of the displaced
drug in the plasma. In the past, it has been wrongly assumed that these free drug
concentrations will remain raised. This is not so. What in fact occurs is that the
increased free drug in the plasma quickly distributes throughout the body and may
localize in the tissues. When equilibrium is again reached (assuming the volume
into which the drug distributes is large) the free concentration in the plasma will
be the same, or near to its pre-interaction level. The ‘total’ drug concentration (i.e.
bound plus free drug) in the plasma will decrease after the equilibrium for free
drug is reached. The ultimate consequence, therefore, of a plasma protein-binding
displacement interaction is to lower total drug concentration in the plasma and to
leave free drug concentration unchanged. Since pharmacological actions, including
toxicities, correlate with free drug in the plasma, any increased effect seen after
displacement is usually of a transient nature and, in most cases, is clinically unimportant.

PROTEINS INVOLVED IN DRUG BINDING
The main binding proteins in plasma are albumin and al-acid glycoprotein. Albumin
consists of a single polypeptid chain and is present in plasma at a concentration of
35-45 g/l (ca. 0.6 mM) in normal healthy subjects. The binding of albumin can be
compromized by the presence of increased concentrations of endogenous displacing
agents, e.g. in kidney disease. Albumin, unlike al-acid glycoprotein which only
binds basic drugs, can bind both acidic and basic compounds. Diseases and events
that can increase the concentration of al-acid glycoprotein will therefore result in
increazed drug binding, e.g. myocardial infarction and Crohn’s disease (Piafsky et
al., 1978).
Disease states can alter plasma protein binding and these can complicate drugdrug binding interactions. A number of authors have investigated these phenomena
and their work has been summarized in tabular form by McElnay (1996). His table
is summarized here (Table 2).
As well as protein concentration, the other main determinant of the amount of
protein binding to plasma is the number of binding sites per molecule of protein
and the strength of binding between the drug and its binding site. Two major
binding areas have been identified on albumin, e.g. piroxicam has been shown to

13

Table 2. THE INFLUENCh OF DISEASES ON DKUG PLASMA PROTEIN t)lNllING*
Drug

Disease

YOfree or
free fraction
(control vs. patient)

Sig.
diff.

Clinical sig./
comment

References

Carbamazepine

Alc. liver disease, renal
failure, rheumatoid
arthritis, ulcerative colitis

22.7 vs. 19.5

Y

Not clinically sig. Caution in interpreting total
drug concentrations. Correlation with AGP
shown.

Barruzi et al.,
1986

Diazepam

Early pregnancy
Mid pregnancy
Late pregnancy

1.8 vs. 1.9
1.8 vs. 2.1
1.8 vs. 2.6

N
Y
Y

Large V, and therapeutic index means change
is not clinically important in chronic use. If
used in status epilepticus may have potentiated
action in late pregnancy due to increased free
fraction.

Perucca et al.,
1981

Uraemia

2.9 vs. 4.5

-

Not indicated. Site I1 not affected by
carbamylation. Endogenous binding inhibitors
implicated.

Calvo et al.,
1982

Uraemia
Kidney transpl.
Nephrotic syndr.

1.64 vs. 3.23
1.50 vs. 2.11
1.60 vs. 3.55

Y
Y
Y

Not indicated, but an important difference
implicated when interpreting kinetic data with
regard to type of renal disease and the protein
involved in binding.

Grossman et al.,
1982

Chronic cardiac failure

=1 vs. 1.5

N

Does not alter diazepam binding site affinity.

Fitchl et al.,
1983

Acute uraemia
Chronic uraemia

2 vs. 6
2 vs. 4

Y
Y

Large therapeutic index means that drug effect
can be monitored clinically as clinical end
point can be determined safely.

Tiula and
Ncuvoncn. 1986

Age-related decrease in
renal function

1.8 vs. 3.0

Y

Pharmacokinetic changes but no clinical
implication.

Tiula and
Elfving, 1987

Digitoxin

Chronic cardiac failure

6 vs. 5.9

N

Not significant

Fitchl et a / . ,
1983

Digitoxin

End-stage renal disease
(haemodialysis)

2.0 vs. 2.5

N

Difference too small to have any therapeutic
consequence.

Lahman and
Merkus, 1987

Disopyramide

MI

0.25 vs. 0.15
(at 2 mgll)
0.53 vs. 0.32
(at 5 mg/l)

Y

Binding varies with drug and protein conc.
May be clinically significant as AGP conc.
decreases post MI.

David et al.,
1983

Table 2. CONTlNUED
Drug

Disease

% free or
free fraction
(control vs. patient)

Sig.
diff.

Clinical sig.1
comment

References

MI

0.2 vs. 0.13

Y

Not indicated. Pharmacokinetic change
suggested. Interpretation of total drug levels
caution.

Caplin et al.,
1985

Flecainide

MI

39 vs. 47

Y

Not indicated. Endogenous compounds may
lead to displacement and decreased binding.

Caplin et al.,
1985

Imipramine

Chronic cardiac failure

19 vs. 18

N

Drug binding not affected.

Fitchl et al.,
1983

Lignocaine

Uraemia
Kidney transpl.

30.7 vs. 20.8
33.7 vs. 24.6

Y
Y

Interpreting kinetic data with regard to the
type of renal disease and the protein involved
in binding may be important.

Grossman et al.
1982

Nephrotic syndr.

30.4 vs. 34.2

N

NIDDM

32 vs. 30

N

Not indicated (but no change expected)

O’Byrne et al.,
1988

Cardiac arrhythmia

26.03 vs. 24.70

N

Not significant.

Somani et al.,
1984

Lorcainide

Renal disease

26.03 vs. 29.04

N

Not significant.

Metoclopramide

Renal disease

0.6 vs. 0.59

N

Not significant.

Webb et al.,
1986

Phenylbutazone

Alc. hepatitis
Alc. cirrhosis

6 vs. 13
6 vs. 19

Y
Y

Not known. Bilirubin and hypoalbuminaemia
implicated in binding defect.

Brodie and
Boobis, 1978

Phenytoin

Early pregnancy**
Mid pregnancy
Late pregnancy

9.7 vs. 10.6
9.7 vs. 10.9
9.7 vs. 12.6

Y
Y
Y

Important in drug monitoring interpretation.
Decreased albumin concentration in pregnancy
implicated.

Perucca et al.,
1981

Chronic cardiac failure

=15 vs. 15

N

Not significant.

Fitchl et al.,
1983

Acute uraemia
Chronic uraemia

10 vs. 25
10 vs. 24

Y
Y

Important clinically in drug monitoring,
although free conc. remains the same due to
pharmacokinetic compensation.

Tiula and
Neuvonen, 1986

Table 2. CONTINUED

YOfree or
free fraction
(control vs. patient)

Sig.
diff.

Clinical sig.1
comment

References

10 vs. 13.5

Y

Important in drug monitoring.

17.7 vs. 28.6

Y

Not significant as elimination and V , altered,
therefore, normalising free conc.

Tiula and
Elfving, 1987
Bergrem et al.,
1983

2.26 x lo3
vs. 4.20 x 1 0 3 ~ - '
2.12 x 10'
(albumin K,)
vs. 3.44 x 1 0 ' ~ - '
(transcortin K,)

Y

Not known. Altered pharmacokinetic
disposition, due to change in binding.

Frey and Frey,
1984

Chronic cardiac failure

14 vs. 14

N

AGP binding not affected.

Fitchl et al.,
1983

Cancer, MI and IHD,
infection, heart failure,
COPD, CVA, miscell.

10.8 vs. 5.5

Y

Not clinically significant but may be important
when interpreting drug levels.

Paxton and
Briant, 1984

Acute uraemia
Chronic uraemia

10 vs. 9
10 vs. 8.9

Not significant.
Not indicated.

Tiula and
Neuvonen, 1986

Salicylate

Acl. hepatitis
Alc. cirrhosis

27 vs. 34
27 vs. 41

Not known. Bilirubin and hypoalbuminaemia
implicated in binding defect.

Brodie and
Boobis, 1978

Sulphadiazine

Alc. hepatitis
Alc. cirrhosis

46 vs. 58
46 vs. 51

Not known. Bilirubin and hypoalbuminaemia
implicated in binding defect.

Brodie and
Boobis, 1978

Sulphisoxazole

Uraemia

5.2 vs. 21.8

Not indicated. Carbamylation of drug binding
site I implicating in defect; site I1 not affected.

Calvo et al.,
1982

Theophylline

Acute illness in COPD

Y
N

Not significant as free concentration is not
changed significantly.

Zarowitz et al.,
1985

Tolfenamic acid

Renal disease
Liver disease

54.6 vs. 69.7
7.4 vs. 8.1
(Pg/ml)
0.08 vs. 0.17
0.08 vs. 0.29

Y
Y

Not clear. High affinity for red blood cells
means that these may act as reserve binding
sites when free fraction increases.

Laznicek and
Senius, 1986

Drug

Disease

Prednisolone

Age-related decrease in
renal function
Porto-systemc shunt
Nephrotic syndr.

Propranolol

+
a

>
K

i?2
F:

C

>

U

<
m

E

m

N

Table 2. CONTINUED
Drug

Diseuse

% free or
free fraction
(control vs. patient)

Sig.
diff.

Clinical sig.1
comment

References

Valproic acid

Renal disease

8.4 VS. 20.3

Y

Not clear. May lead to increased incidence of
toxicity. Important in drug monitoring
interpretation.

Gugler and
Mueller, 1978

Early pregnancy**
Mid pregnancy
Late pregnancy

9.4 vs. 11.5
9.4 vs. 12.1
9.4 vs. 14.6

Y
Y
Y

Important in drug monitoring. Decreased
albumin serum concentration iinplicated in
binding defect.

Perucca et al.,
1981

IDDM

6.2 vs. 7.6

Y

Not significant if diabetes is well controlled. If
poorly controlled increased free conc. may be
greater.

Gatti et al.,
1987

Arrhythmia

-

-

Not indicated. Pharmacokinetic change may be
implicated.

McGowan et
al., 1982

Liver disease

0.099 vs. 0.16

Y

Clinical end point effective to titrate dose so
change not significant in therapy. Change may
be relevant when interpreting kinetic data and
total drug concentrations.

Giacomini et
al.. 1984

Chronic cardiac failure

1 vs. 1

N

No change expected.

Fitchl et al.,
1983

NIDDM

1.1 vs. 1

N

Not indicated (but no change expected).

O’Byrne et al.,
1988

Uraemia

1.4 vs. 4

Y

Decrease due to endogenous inhibitors. Not
clinically significant.

Pritchard et al.,
1983

Verapamil

Warfarin

Zomepirac

Y , yes; N, no; MI, myocardial infarction; Transpl, transplant; IHD, ischaemic heart disease; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary discase; CVA, cerebro-vascular accident;
AGP, a,-acid glycoprotein; K,, drug-protein association constant; miscel, miscellaneous; V,, apparent volume of distribution; Alc, alcoholic; NIDDM, non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus; IDDM, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
*Source: McElnay (1996).
**Although pregnancy is not a disease, it can give rise to changed binding; therefore it has been included in this table.

18

r
Df

L

Fig.2. Plot devised by Scatchard (1949) for druglmacro-molecule interaction for a single class of binding
site ( r = moles of drug bound per mole of protein; Df = molar free drug concentration; n = number of

primary binding sites). If more than a single class of binding site is involved in the binding interaction,
the plot will be curved.

bind to the apozone locus (site I) and to a lesser extent to the diazepam site (site
11) (Bree et al., 1990). The strength of binding is measured in terms of the association
constant between drug and protein, the larger the association constant the more
avid the binding (D’Arcy and McElnay, 1982).
A drug may have different classes of binding sites with different affinities, e.g.
tolbutamide has been estimated to have 2.27 primary binding sites (with an association constant of 21.86 x 10“M-l) and 8.21 secondary binding sites (with an association constant of 1.71 x 10’M-l) per molecule of albumin (Crooks and Brown,
1974). If a drug has only one class of binding site, a straight line plot is achieved
in the graphical representation devised by Scatchard (Fig. 2), which having binding
data over a range of protein and/or drug concentrations, can be used to determine
ëní (number of binding sites per molecule of protein) and ë K (association constant).
The graph becomes curved if more than one class of binding site is involved and
the interpretation becomes difficult (McElnay, 1996). The difficulties involved in
interpreting binding data have been addressed by Plumbridge et aZ. (1978).
The chirality of drugs has raised current interest in relation to interactions with
receptor sites and in the difference of pharmacological actions produced by different
optical isomers of the same compound. Binding of drugs to plasma proteins can

DRUG INTERACTIONSAT PLASMA AND TISSUE BINDING SITES

19

also be stereoselective. There are two illustrative examples with the isomers of
propranolol and verapamil.
The difference of binding of the R- and S-isomers of propranolol in maternal,
but not foetal, serum has been shown to be significant, with the R/S ratio being
significantly larger in the mother than in the foetus. For verapamil, the difference
in binding of the R- and S-isomers was significant in both the mother and the foetus,
although the R/S ratio was similar in both (Belpaire et al., 1995).
Although the protein binding of drugs primarily involves albumim, other agents
are also involved; they have been summarized by McElnay (1996) as: digoxin which
binds strongly to cardiac muscle; bilirubin binds with ligandin; some cytoxics bind
to the DNA; many drugs are bound by melanin; some drugs are bound to red blood
cells, which recent studies have shown to have at least three binding sites (Hasegawa
et al., 1994).
INFLUENCE OF PLASMA AND TISSUE BINDING ON DRUG KINETICS
i. Absorption
Both plasma and tissue binding of drugs will favour a more rapid absorption of
drugs from the intestine or the injection site. These effects are, however, very
marginal in comparison with the influence of protein binding on drug distribution
and elimination. Plasma and tissue protein have opposing effects on drug distribution. Since plasma proteins are largely retained within the plasma compartment,
drugs which are highly bound to plasma proteins tend to have low apparent volumes
of distribution (Vd). Warfarin, for example, which is highly bound to plasma albumin (>99%) has a low Vd (O.ll/kg) indicating poor diffusion into the tissues
(Tillement et al., 1978). Drugs which are highly bound to tissues tend to have a
high Vd. For drugs which are highly bound to plasma and tissues, the Vd will depend
on the relative binding in both sites. For example with tricyclic antidepressants and
phenothiazines almost all the drug in the plasma is bound to albumin, however,
due to extensive tissue binding of these drugs, the circulating drug in plasma
represents only a small fraction of the total drug in the body (Koch-Weser and
Sellers, 1976). The equilibrium which exists between tissue and plasma binding is
represented in Fig. 3. Only unbound drug is able to diffuse to receptor sites and
exert therapeutic effects.
ii. Elimination
Drug elimination involves primarily the liver and kidneys, therefore if a drug is
highly bound to tissues it will be protected against elimination since much of the
drug will be outside the plasma compartment and will therefore not be delivered
to the liver or kidneys for elimination. In addition, the extent of plasma protein
binding can have marked effects on drug clearance by these organs. Consider first
drug metabolism. For most drugs, plasma protein binding is protective in that the
affinity for plasma binding sites exceeds that for metabolizing activity. It is therefore

20

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Plasma

Tissues

/

Free
drug

Free
drug

Fig. 3. Distribution of drug between plasma and tissue compartments. Only free (pharmacologically

active) drug can diffuse out of the plasma; the equilibrium would therefore move towards the right after
displacement from plasma binding and toward the left after displacement from tissue binding sites. Free
drug concentrations in the plasma and tissue compartments are equal. Quantities of drug bound will
depend on the amount of binding materials present in both plasma and tissues and their respective
binding capacities (after Tillement et al., 1980).

only free (unbound) drug that is metabolized during passage through the liver (or
other metabolic site). Such drugs would be considered to have a low hepatic
extraction ratio. Conversely if a drug has a high extraction ratio, the attraction to
metabolic enzyme systems in the liver will overcome the binding affinity for plasma
proteins and bound drug will be stripped from the binding sites to undergo metabolic
change (McElnay and D’Arcy, 1983).
A similar process applies to the kidneys. Glomerular filtration is a passive process
and only allows free (unbound) drug to pass through the glomerulus because protein
molecules are too large to be filtered. Plasma protein binding therefore protects a

DRUG INTERACTIONS AT PLASMA AND TISSUE BINDING SITES

21

drug against elimination by glomerular filtration. Although glomerular filtration is
the main mechanism of drug elimination via the kidneys, a number of drugs (e.g.
penicillins) are actively secreted in the tubular urine. In summary, plasma protein
binding tends to facilitate elimination by limiting drug distribution, thereby allowing
more drug to be presented to the kidneys for elimination (McElnay, 1996).

DISPLACEMENT OF DRUGS FROM BINDING SITES
Most displacement of drugs from plasma binding sites is via a direct competition
of the two drugs involved for the same binding sites. Drugs with a higher association
constant will displace drugs with a lower association constant at common binding
sites. The displacement of warfarin by phenylbutzone is a good example of this
type of interaction. As well as the competitive displacement interactions, the binding
of one drug to, for example, albumin, can give rise to changes in the conformation
of the protein and so change the shape of the binding sites for a second drug.
Acetylsalicylic acid influences the binding of certain drugs, e.g. flufenamic acid
and phenylbutazone by this non-competitive mechanism via permanently acetylating
lysine residues of albumin (Pinkard et al., 1973). Other examples of this type of
displacement have been given by McElnay (1996) in his review.
THERAPEUTIC CONSEQUENCES OF INTERACTIONS INVOLVING
DRUG DISPLACEMENT
Two well-known interactions: (i) between tolbutamide and sulphonamides (Christensen et al., 1963); and (ii) between warfarin and phenylbutazone (Aggler et al.,
1967) which, respectively, increased the hypoglycaemic effect of tolbutamide, and
significantly increased prothrombin time, triggered off clinical interest in displacement interactions and plasma binding displacement was heralded as an important
interaction mechanism. The problem with these reports is that the work was carried
out in vitro, and whereas displaced drug cannot distribute further than the confines
of the dialysis cell, in the in vivo situation the displaced drug can distribute out of
the plasma compartment into the relatively large sink of tissues. This moves the
equilibrium situation shown in Fig. 3 in an anticlockwise direction. In addition,
increased amounts of free drug will be presented to sites of elimination (liver and
kidneys) immediately after displacement has occurred.
These compensatory effects of redistribution and increased elimination of free
drug lead only to a transient increase in free (active) drug in the plasma, whilst at
equilibrium (steady-state) the free concentration of the drug will equate to preinteraction levels. In addition, since distribution from drug to its receptor in the
plasma is often not instantaneous, but via a first-order process with comparable
rate to general drug distribution, this will also reduce the extent of the transient
increase in effect of the displaced drug. If the displacer drug is given orally, rapid
compensatory effects may prevent even the transient increase in free drug concentration from taking place. This displacement does, however, lead to important changes

22

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

TIME

Fig. 4. Typical plasma concentration time profile for a drug interaction involving tissue binding displace-

ment. An almost immediate increase in total plasma concentration (due to a decrease V,) is seen.
Elimination half-life is shown to be increased. This is because of increased amounts of both free and
bound drug being presented at sites of elimination (after D’Arcy and McElnay, 1982).

in the displaced drugs apparent volume of distribution (increased) , the total concentration of drug in plasma (decreased, Fig. 4) and the free fraction of drug in plasma
(increased). This means that the same pharmacological effect will be achieved from
a reduced total (free and bound) serum concentration of the drug (McElnay, 1996).
It follows therefore that the interactions which in the past have been attributed
solely to plasma binding displacement must have a different underlying mechanism.
The best example of this is the warfarin-phenylbutazone interaction. As long
ago as 1974, Lewis et al. discovered a metabolic mechanism for this interaction.
Phenylbutazone was shown to stereo-selectively inhibit the metabolism of the Sisomer of warfarin which is some five to six times more potent than the R-isomer
and there was a corresponding increase in the elimination of the R-warfarin. The
increased proportion of the more potent S-warfarin gave rise to increased anticoagulation.
Azapropazone gives rise to markedly increased prothrombin times when administered together with warfarin (Powerll-Jackson, 1977). Although azapropazone is a
powerful displacer of warfarin from plasma binding sites (McElnay and D’Arcy,
1980), this displacement cannot explain the increased pharmacological effect seen
and, although it has never been investigated, it would appear that a metabolic

t

DRUG INTERACTIONS AT PLASMA AND TISSUE BINDING SITES

I

23

24

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

effect similar to that with phenylbutazone takes place (azapropazone has structural
similarities to phenylbutazone) ,
In his review on drug interactions in plasma and tissue binding sites, McElnay
(1996) has described other interactions which were initially described as being due
to plasma-binding displacement and which now have been demonstrated to have
other mechanisms responsible for the interaction. These include: warfarin/sulphamethoxazole and sulphinpyrazone; methotrexate/salicylate; phenytoin/valproate, and tolbutamide/sulphonamideinteractions.
Although in most cases plasma-binding displacement interactions per se do not
give rise to clinically significant interactions, McElnay (1996) has described three
main exemptions to this general rule, namely when there is a rapid infusion of a
displacing drug; when there is parenteral administration of a displaced drug having
a high extraction rate, and in therapeutic drug monitoring.

COMMENT
Generally, therefore, although current opinion accepts that the binding of drugs to
protein is an important pharmacokinetic parameter, it is of the view that its importance as a mechanism of drug-drug interaction has been overestimated and overstated since the effects are of a transient nature. It is only considered to be problematic with regard to adverse clinical outcomes under specific conditions. Drug
interactions which in the past have been attributed to plasma binding displacement
have another underlying mechanism usually involving decreased elimination of the
drug in the liver or kidney. Rolan (1994) has drawn up an algorithm to help
assist in determining whether displacement interactions are likely to be clinically
significant. A copy of this algorithm is shown in Fig. 5 .

3. DRUG INTERACTIONS AND
DRUG-METABOLIZING ENZYMES
Induction or inhibition of the collection of isoenzymes, collectively known as cytochrome P450 enzymes, are mechanisms that have been shown to underlie some of
the more serious drug-drug interactions (Tables 3 and 4). Many such interactions
can be explained by alterations in the metabolic enzymes that are present in the
liver and other extra-hepatic tissues. Cytochrome P450 is not a single species of
protein, the system is actually a collection of isoenzymes, all of which possess an
iron atom in a prophyrin complex. At current time some 154 cytochrome P450
genes have been characterized from humans, animals, insect and plant species.
They catalyse different types of oxidation reactions and under certain circumstances
may catalyse other types of reaction such as reduction (Timbrell, 1993).
Since the early experiments of Conney and co-workers (Conney et al., 1956,
1957; Conney, 1967) it has often been observed that the rate of oxidative metabolism
of various substances can differ markedly depending on the age, sex, species or the
extent of exposure of the animal to different inducing agents. A number of investigators have directed studies to evaluate the number and types of cytochrome P450s
that exist in a single organ. In particular they questioned whether specific types of
reactions catalyzed by the microsomal electron transport system required specific
cytochrome P450, or whether many cytochrome P450s have a broad substrate
specifically differing only in the rate of catalysis of each reaction.
Since the early studies of the 1950s more than 800 different xenobiotics, many of
which are therapeutic drugs, have been shown to be substrates for liver microsomal
oxidative enzymes. The major types of oxidation reaction catalyzed by the cytochrome P450 system can be subdivided into oxidation or hydroxylation (e.g. many
drugs including paroxetine), deamination (e.g. amphetamine), dealkylation (e.g.
morphine), sulphoxidation (e.g. chlorpromazine, paroxetine), desulphuration (e.g.
thiopentone), dehalogenation (e.g. halogenated anaesthetics) and glucoronidation
(e.g . paroxetine) .
Certain oxidative reactions of xenobiotics are also catalyzed by enzymes other
than the cytochrome P450 monooxygenase system. For example alcohols may be
oxidized by alcohol dehydrogenase; xanthine oxidase catalyzes the oxidation of
nitrogen heterocyclics such as the purine hypoxanthine. Some amines such as tyramine are substrates for monoamine oxidases; diamines such as putrescine are metabolized by the soluble enzyme diamine oxidase. The peroxidases are also involved in
the oxidation of xenobiotics, the most important being prostaglandin synthase,
which is known to catalyze the oxidation of p-phenetidine, a metabolite of phen-

25

26

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 3. SOME EXAMPLES OF COMPOUNDS AND DRUGS ACTING AS ENZYME INDUCERS
Alcohol
Chlorinated hydrocarbon pesticides
Polycyclic hydrocarbons (e.g. dioxin) and other environmental pollutants
Tobacco smoking
Many therapeutic drugs, including:
- barbiturates
- carbamazepine
- carbenoxolene
- ciprofloxacin
- clofibrate
- glucagon
- glucocorticoids (e.g. dexamethoasone)
- isoniazid
- phenylbutazone
- phenytoin
- primidone
- rifampicin
- theophylline

Table 4. SOME EXAMPLES OF COMPOUNDS AND DRUGS ACTING AS ENZYME INHIBITORS
Cobalt chloride
Industrial solvents (e.g. carbon tetrachloride, dimethylformamide, etc.)
Organophosphorus compounds
Many therapeutic drugs including:
- allopurinol
- amiodarone
- chloramphenicol
- cimetidine
- corticosteroids
- cyclophosphamide
- danazol
- dextropropoxyphene
- dicoumarol
- erythromycin
- felbamate
- fluconazole
- glibenclamide
- influenza vaccine
- iproniazid
- itraconazole
- ketoconazole
- MAOI-antidepressants
- moricizine
- nicoumalone
- 4-quinolones and fluoroquinolone antibacterials (e.g. ciprofloxacin, enoxacin, lomefloxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin, perfloxacin
- selegiline
- serotonin re-uptake inhibitor antidepressants (SRIs)
- tamoxifen
- triacetvloleandomvcin

DRUG INTERACTIONS AND DRUG-METABOLISING ENZYMES

27

Table 5. CYTOCHROMES ~ 4 5 0IN HUMANS (BASED ON GONZALEZ, im)*
Subfamily

Members

Chromosome
(locus)

Established
Functionslactivities
Metabolizes

CYPlAl

CYPlAl
CYPlA2

15q22-qter

aflatoxin B1
arylamine and
its promutagens
acetaminophen
benzo[a]pyrene
caffeine
food mutagens
phenacetin
warfarin

CYP2A

CYP2A6
CYP2A7

19q1213.2

aflatoxin B1
N-nitrosodiethylamine
warfarin

CYP2B

CYP2B6
CYP2B7

19

warfarin

CYP2C

CYP2C9
CYP2C10
CYP2C17

10q24.124.3

mephentoin
tolbutamide

Induced by

Ketoconazole
Omeprazole
Polycyclic
aromatic
hydrocarbons
Tobacco smoke

Phenobarbitone

warfarin
CYP2C18
CYP2C19
CYPZD

CYP2D6
CYP2D7P
CYP2D8P

22qll-2qter

debrisoquine
sparteine
nitrosamine
carcinogen (NNK)

Tobacco smoke

CYP2E

CYP2E1

10

acetone
caffeine
chlorzoxazone
paracetamol
solvents
N-nitrosodimethylamine

Ethanol

CYP2F

CYP2F1

19

naphthylamine

CYP3A

CYP3A3
CYP3A4
CYP3A5
CYP3A7

7q21-22.1

aflatoxins
benzo[a]pyrene
cyclosporin
erythromycin
17-ethinyloestradiol
lidocaine
midazolam
nifedipine
quinidine
warfarin

Dexamethasone
Steroids

*Other cytochrome P450s have been detected in animals; multiple gene conversions have occurred among some animal
CYP genes rendering them quite dissimilar to their counterparts in humans.

28

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

acetin, a process that may be involved in the nephrotoxicity of the drug (Timbrell,
1993).
During the last 10 years or so, a vast amount of work has been done on the
identification and characterization of human xenobiotic-metabolizing cytochrome
P450s. Black (1993) has reviewed the cytochrome P450 structure and function and
Gonzalez (1993) cytochrome P450 in humans. Mammalian P450 enzymes are tightly
bound in both microsomes (endoplasmic reticulum) and mitochondria. Purified
preparations exhibit a high amphilic character and exist as micellar aggregates of
approximately six protomers (Dean and Gray, 1982). The enzymes are discrete
gene products of about 57000 molecular weight and contain one equivalent of btype heme per polypeptide.
The most abundantly expressed cytochrome P450s in human liver are the CYP3A
family; other subfamilies in human tissues are CYPlA, CYP2B, CYP2C, CYP2E,
and CYP2F. The locus, function and activities of these are shown in Table 5.
Cytochrome P450 is the subject of an excellent and comprehensive book by Schenkman and Greim (1993) and an article specifically dealing with drug interactions and
drug-metabolizing enzymes has been prepared by D’Arcy (1996).

4. INTERACTIONS INVOLVING RENAL
EXCRETORY MECHANISMS
Interactions involving renal excretory mechanisms can have important clinical
implications in terms of patient mortality and morbidity. It is fortunate that an
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of renal drug transport has allowed
predictions to be made of potential drug interactions in early phase drug development. This understanding together with the availability of in vitro models of renal
drug transport has also been used as an early guide to potential in vivo drug
interactions.
The kidney represents the final elimination organ for virtually all foreign substances irrespective of whether they are cleared unchanged or as metabolites formed
in the body predominantly by the liver. Somogyi (1996) has reviewed drug interactions involving renal excretory mechanisms and much of the following text is summarized from his comprehensive account.
The functional unit of the kidney is the nephron (Fig.6), which filters, secretes
and resorbs molecules. Glomerular filtration (ca. 120 ml/min) involves the forcing
of fluids containing dissolved substances through the endothelial-capsular membrane. This membrane, which acts as a filter, allows some materials to pass through
whilst restricting the passage of others. The resulting filtrate is free of protein and
substances with a molecular weight of greater than 40000 and about 208, in diameter. The mechanism by which drugs can interact at the glomerulus are:
(i) Displacement from protein-binding sites. The pharmacokinetic consequence
of this will be that unbound fraction of drug in the plasma will increase and clearance
of the drug by the glomerulus will also increase in direct proportion to the increase
in the unbound fraction. There are very few examples in the literature of drugdrug interactions occurring exclusively at the glomerulus (Somogyi, 1996).
(ii) Where the glomerulus is physically damaged through, for example, the
nephrotoxic action of a xenobiotic. In such a case, the maximum clearance of a
drug will be equal to the glomerular filtration rate, irrespective of the value of the
drug’s unbound fraction. This type of interaction is poorly documented and would
rarely occur on its own (Somogyi, 1996).
The blood flow to the kidney then passes to the tubular network where active
transport systems are capable of removing drugs and endogenous substances from
blood and secreting them into the lumen of the kidney. This occurs at the site of
the proximal tubule, where there are a number of transporters for organic anions
and cations. Specific transporters for these anions and cations occur at both the

29

30

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Fig. 6. Tubule transport systems and sites of action of diuretics. (Source: Warnock, 1982)

luminal (brush border)and contraluminal membranes of the epithelial cells lining
the proximal tubule (Somogyi, 1996).
The transport process for organic anions has been reviewed by several groups
(Mdler and Sheikh, 1983; Ullrich, 1994; Somogyi, 1996); although not fully evaluated in humans, the renal transporter of organic anions (p-aminohippuric acid
being the most commonly used probe substrate) is located at the contraluminal
membrane. The cellular uptake of organic ions has been termed a tertiary active
transport process since the primary transporter is the ATPO sodium/potassium
transport step, which activates a sodium-dicarboxylate transporter, creating an ketoglutarate gradient which is exchanged for the organic ion (Somogyi, 1996).
The transport process for organic cations has been reviewed by Peters (1960);
Rennick (1981) and Somogyi (1996). Secretion of organic cations across the mammalian kidney occurs along the entire length of the proximal tubule. At the contraluminal membrane there is evidence for one common transport system. At the luminal
membrane, the transport of organic cations occurs by an electroneural H+/organic
cation system. The driving force at this luminal interface is the sodium/hydrogen

INTERACTIONS INVOLVING RENAL EXCRETORY MECHANISMS

31

Proximal Tubular Cell
Lumen

Interstitium

2 Nat
Sulfate

Sulfate
Oxalate
VI
3 Na+
B
Dicarboxylales
*a
Hydrophobic
4
Monocarboxylate(PAH)
a Ketoglutarate

3 Na+
Dicaboxylates

PAH
X

-

2 Nat
Lactate

N 1-Methyl-nicotinamide

H+
Cations

Luminal Transporters

(NMeNt)
X

!E

Contraluminal Transporters

Fig. 7 . Location of transporters for organic anions and cations in the renal proximal tubule (from
Ullrich (1994)). Note: PAH is the organic anion p-aminohippuric acid.

transporter, which transports sodium ions into the cell and hydrogen ions out (Fig.
7) (Somogyi, 1996).
A key feature of a drug undergoing tubular secretion is that it will compete with
another drug for secretion, thus competition for transport is competitive. The drug
with the higher affinity for the transporter will be a more potent inhibitor of the
transport of a similar chemical substance for the same transporter. Hence organic
anions will compete with one another for transport (e.g. probenecid and penicillin)
and organic cations will compete with one another (e.g. cimetidine and procainamide). This is the most common type of drug-drug interaction involving renal excretory mechanisms (Somogyi, 1996).
As the drug passes down the tubular lumen into the distal tubule and collecting
duct, passive diffusion of drug takes place driven by the concentration gradient of
drug across the cellular membrane back into the blood. The process of passive
reabsorption is applicable to the unionized lipid-soluble form of the drug. Thus the
p K , of the drug and the pH of the tubular fluid become important, as only the unionized form is sufficiently lipid soluble to diffuse through the epithelial membranes
of the tubule cells. Hence any drug which alters urine pH or urine flow rate
(which alters the concentration gradient) has the potential for altering the tubular
resorption of other drugs. The significance of any interaction at this site is often of
minor importance since the basic requirement is the degree of lipid solubility of the
drug and, in general, lipid-soluble drugs are extensively metabolized by the liver
rather than being extensively cleared by the kidney. Exceptions to this include the
ephedrine series, salicylates and chlorpromazine (Somogyi, 1996).

TUBULAR SECRETION
Of the mechanisms for renal drug excretion, drug interactions predominantly involve tubular secretion. The most commonly investigated interacting drug has been

32

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 6. SOME INTERACTIONS INVOLVING RENAL CLEARANCE*
Amiodarone-procainamide
Amiodarone reduced the total body clearance of procainamide by 23%. This appears to be
predominantly due to renal clearance, most likely as a consequence of competition for active tubular
secretion.
Cimetidine-amiloride
Cimetidine reduced the renal clearance of amiloride by 17% but did not affect the area under the
plasma amiloride concentration-time curve.

Cimetidine-cephalothin/cephalexin
Cimetidine had no effect on the renal clearance of the organic anion cephalothin, however, it reduced
the renal clearance of the zwitterion cephalexin by 20%. It was concluded that cimetidines effect was
specific for organic cations and that both anion and cation transport systems might be involved for
those zwitterions that undergo tubular secretion.
Cimetidine-metformin
Cimetidine increased the area under the plasma metformin concentration-time curve by an average of
50%, this was associated with a 27% reduction in the renal clearance of metformin.
Cimetidine-nicotine
Cimetidine reduced the renal clearance of nicotine by approximately 50% but did not affect the renal
clearance of the metabolite continine.
Cimetidme-pindolol
Cimetidine increased the area under the plasma pindolol concentration-time curve (R(+) 10% ; S(-)
26%) and reduced its renal clearance. The enantiomer with the higher renal clearance S ( - ) pindolol
had a smaller (mean 26%) cimetidine-induced reduction in renal clearance compared with the R(+)
pindolol (34%). Cimetidine had a stereoselective inhibitory effect on the active transport of organic
cations in the proximal tubule.

Cimetidine-procainamide-acetylprocainamide
Cimetidine increased the area under the plasma concentration-time curve of procainamide by 44%
and prolonged the half-life by 26% due to a marked reduction in the renal clearance of procainamide
(44%). The AUC for acetyprocainamide was increased by 25% with a commensurate reduction in
renal clearance of 24%. These data reinforced the mechanism of competitive inhibition of tubular
secretion of procainamide by cimetidine.
Cimetidine-quinidine
Cimetidine reduced the renal clearance of quinidine by 36%.
Cimetidine-ranitidine
Cimetidine increased the area under the plasma ranitidine concentration-time curve, this was
associated with a 25% reduction in the renal clearance of ranitidine.
Cimetidine-triamterene
Cimetidine increased the area under the plasma triamterene concentration-time curve, this was
associated with a 70% reduction in the renal clearance of triamterene.
Digoxin-amiodarone
Amiodarone reduced the renal clearance of digoxin by 2% ; it also reduced its non-renal clearance.
The reduction in renal clearance of digoxin was interpreted as a reduction in its tubular secretion.
Digoxin-spironolactone
Initial studies showed that spironolactone decreased the renal clearance of digoxin by 30%, as there
was no effect on the glomerular filtration rate the mechanism remained unexplained. Later studies
confirmed these results but the mechanism still remains unclear although it has been suggested to be
due to increased potassium in distal tubular cells increasing digoxin secretion.

INTERACTIONS INVOLVING RENAL EXCRETORY MECHANISMS

33

Table 6 . CONTINUED
Digoxin-quinidine
Several mechanisms, including a reduction in digoxin renal clearance (35%), are thought to be
involved in this interaction. The reduction in renal clearance is consistent with the competition for
active tubular secretion. Since quinidine has no effect on glomerular filtration rate, the results of these
studies have been interpreted as a reduction in the tubular secretion of digoxin by quinidine. It is
possible that both digoxin and quinidine compete for the same carrier-mediated transport system in
the kidney.
Digoxin-verapamillother calcium antagonists
Verapamil increases plasma digoxin concentrations and evokes toxicity, in some cases fatal. The
mechanism is thought to be due to a reduction in the renal clearance of digoxin, although this has
been disputed. Recent studies suggest that the effects of verapamil on digoxin renal clearance may be
transient and may be confounded by alterations in urine flow rate. Most studies with diltiazem or
nifedipine have resulted in contradictory findings and the magnitude of any changes in the disposition
of digoxin have been small.

Famotidine-procainamide-acetylprocainamide
Famotidine had no effect on the total body or renal clearance of procainamide or its metabolite.
Quininelquinidine-amantadine
Quinine and quinidine had no significant effect on amantadine renal clearance in either young or old
subjects. However, when the data were separated according to gender both agents significantly
reduced the renal clearance of amantadine in males but not in females. It was suggested that
testosterone might enhance the renal organic anion and cation transport system of xenobiotics.
Ranitidine-nicotine
Ranitidine had no effect on the renal clearance of nicotine or cotinine.
Ranitidine-procainamide-acet ylprocainamide
High dosage of ranitidine increased the area under the plasma procainamide concentration-time curve
by 20% with a 35% reduction in its renal clearance. The renal clearance for acetylprocainamide was
reduced by 38%. Clinical dosage of ranitidine had little effect on these indices. It was concluded that
any possible effect of ranitidine on the tubular secretion of procainamide or its metabolite only
occurred at plasma concentrations in excess of those produced by normal therapeutic dosage.

Ranitidine-triamterene
Ranitidine reduced the renal clearance of triamterene by 51%. This was interpreted as competition
between ranitidine and triamterene for the renal organic cation transport system. The renal clearance
of its metabolite, the sulphate conjugate or p-hydroxytriamterene, was reduced by 47% which raised
the possibility of multitransport systems.

Trimethoprim-procainamide-acetylprocainamide
Trimethoprim increased steady-state plasma concentrations of procainamide by 62% and
acetylprocainamide by 52%, due to their reductions in renal clearance by 47 and 13%, respectively.
This interaction is consistent with trimethoprim having a higher affinity than procainamide and
acetylprocainamide for the organic cation transporter and hence inhibiting their tubular secretion.
Trimethoprim-zidovudine
Trimethoprim reduced the renal clearance of zidovudine by 58% and in addition reduced the renal
clearance of the glucuronide conjugate of zidovudine by 20%. The renal tubular secretion of
ziduvudine is via the organic cation transport system whilst that of its glucuronide conjugate is via
both organic anion and cation systems.
*Source: references cited by Somogyi (1996).

34

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

probenecid and there are numerous published studies showing that it reduces the
renal clearance of drugs that are organic anions, for example penicillins, allopurinol,
enprofylline and dyphylline, frusemide, indomethacin, clofibrate, sulphinpyrazone,
zidovudine, acyclovir, quinolones, cephalosporins, and famotidine.
Several drug interactions have been reported involving the renal clearance of the
antineoplastic methotrexate. Since the drug has a narrow therapeutic index, these
interactions have on occasion been manifested by overt methotrexate toxicity.
Somogyi (1996) has reviewed those drugs which interact with methotrexate, they
include: probenecid, penicillins, urinary alkalinizers, NSAIDs, including aspirin,
indomethacin, ketoprofen, naproxen, and ibuprofen.
With regard to organic cations, the most commonly investigated interacting drugs
have been cimetidine, other H2-receptor antagonists and trimethoprim. Somogyi
(1996) has reviewed the interactions by which cimetidine reduces the renal clearance
of some organic cations including: procainamide, triamterene, ranitidine, amiloride,
metformin, pindolol, nicotine and quinidine. Studies have also investigated whether
other H2 antagonists (which are organic cations) behave in a similar manner to
cimetidine. Somogyi (1996) has also reviewed those interactions which occur between ranitidine and n-acetylprocainamide (the active metabolite of procainamide),
ranitidine and triamterene, famotidine and n-acetylprocainamide.
Miscellaneous interaction involving renal clearance have also been reviewed by
Somogyi (1996), these include trimethoprim-procainamide, n-acetylprocainamide,
trimethoprim-zidovudine, amiodarone-procainamide, n-acetylprocainamide, quinine/quinidine-amantadine, and some interactions involving organic neutral drugs
including digoxin-amiodarone, digoxin-spironolactone and potassium-sparing diuretics, digoxin-quinidine, digoxin-verapamil, and digoxin-other calcium antagonists. Table 6 summarizes the nature and sequelae of all these interactions.

TUBULAR REABSORPTION

Proximal tubule site

Lithium Salts
The kidney is the major clearance organ for the elimination of lithium. After
filtration of lithium and sodium at the glomerulus, approximately 70% of the filtered
load of sodium and lithium is reabsorbed at the proximal tubule, which does not
distinguish between these two inorganic ions. A number of drugs alter the elimination of lithium by altering its renal clearance. These include NSAIDs and thiazide
and possible loop diuretics, which reduce the renal clearance of lithium and sodium
salts (e.g. sodium bicarbonate) and theophylline which increases the renal clearance
of lithium. These interactions have been categorized by Somogyi (1996); Table 7
summarizes their nature and sequelae.

INTERACTIONS INVOLVING RENAL EXCRETORY MECHANISMS

Table 7. DRUGS WHICH ALTER TUBULAR REABSORETION

35

OF LITHIUM BY ALTERING ITS RENAL CLEARANCE*

Loop diuretics

Increased serum lithium concentrations (61%) in 1/6 normal subjects;
danger of toxicity.

Sodium salts

Failure to achieve and maintain therapeutic serum lithium concentrations.

Theophylline

Renal clearance of lithium increased (42%); decreased half-life; decrease in
serum lithium concentrations (30%).

Thiazide diuretics

Renal clearance of lithium reduced (40-68%); increased serum lithium
concentrations (100%); danger of toxicity.

NSAIDs
Aspirin and salicylates

No significant effect on serum lithium concentrations.

Diclofenac

Decreased renal clearance (23%); increased serum lithium concentrations
(26%).

Ibuprofen

Reduced renal clearance (24%); increased serum lithium concentrations
(15%); reports of lithium toxicity.

Indomethacin

Reduced renal clearance (31%); increased serum lithium concentrations
(43%).

Naproxen

Reduced renal clearance (20%); increased serum lithium concentrations
(16%); a report of lithium toxicity in one patient.

Phenylbutazone

Small increase in serum lithium concentrations (0-15%); side-effects
reported.

Piroxicam

Increased serum lithium concentrations in one patient; adverse effects
reported.

Sulindac

No significant effect on serum lithium concentrations.

*Source: references cited by Somogyi (1996).

Distal tubule/collecting duct site

Chlorpropamide, Pseudoephedrine
Many studies have been conducted to examine the influence of urine pH or flow
rate on the renal clearance of drugs via modifying passive reabsorption. Two such
examples of interactions by this mechanism are quoted by Somogyi (1996): those
involving the organic anion chlorpropamide and the organic cation pseudoephedrine. With chlorpropamide the area under the plasma concentration/time curve
was significantly larger when the urine was made acidic by ingestion of ammonium
chloride than when made alkaline by ingestion of sodium bicarbonate Neuvonen
and Karkkainen (1983). A strong relationship was evident between the half-life of
pseudoephedrine and urinary pH; at pH 5.8 the half-life was about 300 min and at
pH 7.2 it increased to 600 min. There was also a significant correlation between
the renal clearance and urine flow (Brater et al., 1980).

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

B. Pharmacodynamic Drug Interactions

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

5. DRUG-DRUG INTERACTIONS AT THE
RECEPTOR AND OTHER ACTIVE SITES
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS INTERACTIONS
Pharmacodynamic interactions at receptor sites have been extensively reviewed by
Shorderet and Ferrero (1996). Although the majority of drug-drug interactions are
potentially, if not actually hazardous, some are synergistic and may be to the
patients therapeutic advantage. Theoretically, at least, since such interactions are
based on supposedly established mechanisms, they should be more easily prevented
and should have less clinical impact than pharmacokinetic interactions. However,
the relevance of such a view may be questioned in the light of recent advances in
the characterization and detection of kinetic interactions.
Many of the mechanisms underlying pharmacodynamic interactions involve interference with:
(i) Transmission systems, e.g. the noradrenergic synapse, the dopaminergic synapse, the serotonergic synapse, the cholinergic synapse and the GABAergic
synapse.
(ii) Ion channels: interactions may occur via changed affinity for or access to ion
channels, e.g. calcium ion channels, potassium channels and ATP-sensitive
channels.
(iii) Hormonal systems: interactions may involve hormonal treatments (notably
with corticosteriods) and glycaemic regulation.
(iv) Homeostatic regulations: interactions in this category may involve homeostasis
regulations such as renal perfusion, the production of renal prostaglandins and
potassium balance.

Table 8 summarizes drug interaction information that has been given by Schorderet
and Ferrero (1996) on these mechanisms in their review.

SYNERGISTIC INTERACTIONS
Not all drug-drug interactions are hazardous, and some synergistic interactions
when they occur can be of clinical value in therapy. Indeed some food-drug interactions can be valuable, especially when food improves the bioavailability of the active
drug substance for example taking propranolol or metoprolol with food improves
their bioavailability (Melander et al., 1977) and the absorption of cefuroxime axetil
is improved in the presence of food (Ridgway et al., 1991; Reynolds, 1993). Improvements are also seen with food in the absorption of antileprosy agent clofazim-

39

40

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 8. PHARMACODYNAMIC INTERACTIONS: EXAMPLES OF MECHANISMS*
Site of interaction

Transmitter system
Noradrenergic synapse

Sequelae of interaction

Amphetamine and tyramine stimulate the outward transport of
noradrenaline; cocaine and impramine block the inward transport
(reuptake) of noradrenaline.
P-blockers mask the symptoms of hypoglycaemia in the medicated diabetic
patient.

Dopaminergic synapse

Interaction between L-dopa and pharmacological doses of pyridoxine
(vitamin B6) is due to increased peripheral decarboxylation of L-dopa by
the L-aminoacid decarboxylase cofactor which results in a decreased
transfer of L-dopa to the CNS and a concomitant reduction in therapeutic
efficacy.

Serotonergic synapse

Amphetamine and 3,4-methylene dioxy-methamphetamine (‘ectasy’)
stimulate the outward transport of serotonin, while cocaine,
dextromethorphan, pethidine and the selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) block the inward transport of serotonin. The combined
treatment with irreversible MAOIs and SSRIs causes a serotonin
syndrome.

Cholinergic synapse

Most interactions occurring at the cholinergic receptor involve additive
effects between muscarinic receptor blocking drugs (e.g. atropine,
carbamazepine, chlorpromzine, imipramine, ipratropium, etc.).

GABAergic synapse

Benzodiazepines, barbiturates, general anaesthetics, gabapentin, progabide,
vigabatrin and probably alcohol reinforce GABAergic transmission.
Potentiation of CNS depression with increased risk of respiratory
depression is an example of a pharmacodynamic interaction brought about
by the combination of any of these hypnosedative agents. The
administration of flumazenil, penicillins, quinolones, bicuculline, picrotoxin
and cyclodiene insecticides inhibit GABA-mediated processes and have
been reported to cause CNS stimulation or convulsions. Flumazenil is a
benzodiazepine receptor antagonist and may trigger convulsions in the
epileptic patient treated with benzodiazepines.

ION channels
Calciumlsodium ion
channels

Potassium channels

Class I antiarrhythmic drugs have sodium channel blocking properties. The
concomitant administration of anti-arrhythmic drugs with distinct properties
(e.g. class Ia/Ib) may result in either adverse or beneficial interactions. As
an example of the latter, mexiletine (Ib) and quinidine (Ia) in combination
are more effective than each drug given alone in higher dosage. Cardiac
calcium channels are concerned with the additive interaction between class
I1 (P-blockers) and class IV (diltiazem, verapamil) anti-arrhythmic drugs.
The resulting inhibition of atrioventricular conduction is due to the
blockade of nodal calcium channels induced both directly by the calcium
channel blocker and indirectly, via a reduction in sympathetic drive by the
P-blocker.
Torsade de pointes is a potentially lethal ventricular arrhythmia which can
be produced by class I and class I11 antiarrhythmic agents, as well as by
any drug that prolongs repolarization. Synergism is likely to occur when
QT-modifying drugs are given together. This is why mefloquine and
halofantrine should not be used together. Electrolyte disorders caused by
diuretics can precipitate torsade de pointes and have a synergistic effect
with class Ia antiarrhythmics.

DRUG-DRUG INTERACTIONS AT THE RECEPTOR AND OTHER ACTIVE SITES

41

Table 8 . CONTINUED
Site of interaction

Sequelae of interaction

ATP-sensitive
potassium channels

ATP-sensitive K+ channels of the pancreatic B-cells are the target of Kchannel blocking drugs like the hypoglycaemic sulphonylureas which reduce
membrane polarization. This increases the opening probability of calcium
channels resulting in insulin release. On the contrary, diazoxide and
somatostatin are KArp channel openers which hyperpolarize the cell and
inhibit insulin release.

Hormonal system
Adrenal corticosteroids

Glycaemic regulation

Homeostatic regulation
Renal haemodynamics
and drug-induced acute
renal failure

Their metabolic effects (e.g. stimulating hepatic gluconeogenesis and
decreasing peripheral utilization of glucose) which tend to produce a
hyperglycaemic state will reduce the efficacy of insulin and other
antidiabetic agents. Mineralocorticoids aggravate the hypokalaemia induced
by thiazide or loop diuretics. They may interfere with the development of
the protective immune response to vaccines.
Many drugs affect glycaemic regulation and can thus interfere with
antidiabetic agents. For example, p-blockers cause severe hypoglycaemia
and may mask its prodromal signs. Salicylates in high dosage decrease
blood glucose concentrations possibly by increasing insulin secretion.
Decreased renal perfusion is a major factor that predisposes to
nephrotoxicity. Besides various non-drug-related causes, renal perfusion
can be decreased by drug-induced sodium and volume depletion (diuretics)
or by systemic anti-hypertensive agents. With reduced renal perfusion, the
glomerular hydrostatic pressure and filtration rate are maintained through a
balance between angiotensin 11-mediated efferent arteriole constriction and
prostaglandin-effected afferent arteriole dilation. Thus drugs interfering
with either prostaglandin synthesis (e.g. NSAIDs), or the renin-angiotensin
system (e.g. ACE inhibitors) will precipitate acute renal failure.

Prostaglandins,
natriuresis, and antihypertensive drugs

NSAIDs interfere with the production of renal prostaglandins and may
reduce the natriuretic effect of concomitant diuretics, especially frusemide.
NSAIDs can decrease the efficacy of most antihypertensives; piroxicam and
the greatest effect whilst sulindac and aspirin were the least effective.
Caution recommended with OTC NSAIDs in treated and controlled
hypertensive patients.

Potassium homeostasis

All thiazides and loop diuretics increase the renal excretion of potassium.
Hypokalaemia augments the risk of arrhythmias, particularly during
treatment with anti-arrhvthmic drugs. It also increases the toxicity of
cardiac glycosides. Patients taking potassium supplements or potassium
sparing diuretics who take ACE inhibitor antihypertensives have a serious
risk of hyperkalaemia. NSAIDs tend to produce hyperkalaemia by
interfering with renin release; this may be aggravated by taking potassium
supplements or potassium-sparing diuretics.

*Source: references cited by Schorderet and Ferrero (1996).

ine (Holdiness, 1989; Reynolds, 1993), the urinary antiseptic nitrofurantoin (Rosenberg and Bates, 1976), and the antifungal itraconazole (Van Peer et al., 1989). The
antifungal antibiotic griseofulvin is better absorbed in the presence of fatty foods
(Crounse, 1961) or milk (Ginsburg et al., 1983).
There are other examples where drug-drug interactions can improve the efficacy
of therapy, for example the treatment of erythropoietin resistance with cyclosporin
(Almond et al., 1994). The H2-receptor blocker cimetidine binds to microsomal

42

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

P450 enzymes and inhibits the oxidative phase of hepatic drug metabolism, thus
potentiating the effect and/or duration of action of a variety of drugs. These
drugs include anticoagulants (e.g. warfarin), theophylline and aminophylline, some
benzodiazepines, anti-arrhythmic agents (e .g. lignocaine and quinidine), anticonvulsants (e.g. carbamazepine and phenytoin), some P-blockers, narcotic analgesics,
and tricyclic antidepressants (e.g. nortriptyline). Cimetidine also increases the bioavailability of fluorouracil by over 70% without evidence of increased toxicity (see
Griffin et al., 1988).
It is understandable to think that increasing the plasma concentrations of a
primary drug, for example by cimetidine, will automatically and consequently increase the probability of increased toxicity of that drug. However, this may not
always occur and if it does not then the dose-sparing effect on the primary drug
would have both a clinical and cost advantage. There could therefore be much
advantage in searching for a chemical substance which would reversibly inhibit the
P450 oxidase systems without itself having a distinct pharmacological or toxicological
action.
A comprehensive account of the more important treatments with believed synergistic drug combinations has been give by Griffin and D’Arcy (1996).

6. DRUG INTERACTIONS IN VITRO
Currently much information is appearing in the literature usually from pharmaceutical research sources on drug interactions in vitro. Much of this information in the
past has been interactions between drug and drug, and drug and fluid in intravenous
infusions. More recent work has concentrated on interactions between specific
drugs, notably chloroquine, cyclosporin, insulin and vasodilator nitrates, and pharmaceutical packaging materials (glass and plastics), and the mechanisms by which
these in vitro interactions occur.
Within this category are drug interactions with contact lens materials and importantly drug-excipient interactions. In the past, it has not always been appreciated
that the so-called ‘inactive’ excipients used in product formulations are physicochemically active substances which are often quite capable of interacting or producing complexes with drug substances in the formulation. They can cause changed
absorption and altered bioavailability. The often quoted outbreak of phenytoin
intoxication in Australia during 1968-9 was caused by increased bioavailability due
to a simple change in capsule -filler from calcium sulphate to lactose (Tyrer et al.,
1970).
For some time now, a great deal of effort has been given to the complexing of
drug substances to a variety of polymers with the object of producing sustainedrelease products. Some of this research has been done with proteins, the ultimate
goal being the production of an orally effective insulin.
In vitro interactions may be defined as those interactions which occur outside the
body. Therefore this category includes interactions between drugs due to incompatibility (e.g. drug-drug interactions in an intravenous infusion), due to interaction
of a drug with its container or packaging (e.g. drug binding to an infusion bag),
due to loss of drugs during laboratory analyses (e.g. drug binding to laboratory
equipment) or due to changes in the bioavailability of drugs when the formulation
is altered (McElnay and D’Arcy, 1980). This topic has been recently reviewed by
McElnay and Hughes (1996).
The sequelae of these types of interaction differ from that of the in vivo interactions; the in vivo interaction usually results in enhancement or reduction of drug
efficacy or increase in drug toxicity, whereas in vitro interactions invariably result
in reduced bioavailability (drug efficacy) during dosage. The present chapter is
intended to give a general overview of these types of drug interactions which may
be associated with:

43

44

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

(i) additives to intravenous fluids;
(ii) drug-container/packaging interactions;
(iii) excipients in drug formulations; and
(iv) a special and limited category of drug-contact lens interactions.

INCOMPATIBILITY INTERACTIONS.
i. ADDITIVES TO I.V. FLUIDS, MIXING DRUGS IN SYRINGES, IN LIQUID
PREPARATIONS
This form of interaction is often described as an incompatibility between two agents
and may be physical or chemical in nature. The interaction often occurs in solution,
e.g. following addition of drugs to intravenous fluid containers, after mixing drugs
in syringes or in liquid preparations for oral or topical administration.
Physical incompatibility may be due to immiscibility or insolubility, whereas
chemical incompatibility may be caused by pH change, decomposition or complex
formation. Many such incompatibilities are no longer viewed as being particularly
problematic so far as oral formulations are concerned since easy solutions to the
problems can usually be found. There are often, however, many contemporary
reports in the pharmaceutical literature on drug interactions due to incompatibility
in intravenous fluids. These can either be due to an interaction between two or
more drugs added to intravenous fluids prior to administration or due to a single
added drug being incompatible with the intravenous vehicle. We prepared a list of
such incompatibilities in the previous edition of this book, it has not been updated
here since the number of reports have become far too voluminous. One of the areas
of medicine where simultaneous co-administration of a number of intravenous
medicines is a clinical necessity is cancer chemotherapy.
Fournier et al. (1992) studied the effect of a commercial formulation of 5-fluorouracil on the stability of cisplatin and carboplatin to determine whether the drugs
could be mixed in containers or intravenous lines. When cisplatin was incubated
with 5-fluorouracil HPLC studies demonstrated a rapid disappearance of the parent
platinum compound, the extent of degradation being 75% after 3.5 hr. Degradation
was caused by an interaction between cisplatin and trometamol, an organic amine
proton acceptor which is used as an alkalinizing agent to buffer the 5-fluorouracil
solution at pH 8.2. This interaction was shown to completely inhibit the antitumour
activity of cisplatin in mice. When cisplatin was incubated at the same pH in
trometamol-free sodium hydroxide solutions the parent compound was transformed
into an active compound that was toxic to mice. Degradation of carboplatintrometamol admixtures was similar to that found for cisplatin, but occurred at a
slower rate. It was concluded that both carboplatin and cisplatin were incompatible
with 5-fluorouracil formulations containing trometamol.
Due to the possibility of incompatibility with constituents, as a general rule no
drugs should be added to TPN fluids. To avoid direct contact between TPN fluids
and drugs administered intravenously, Collins and Lutz (1991) have examined the

DRUG INTERACTIONS IN VITRO

45

Fig. 8. Drawings of tips of two types of catheter used in the study of concomitant administration of
phenytoin and TPN fluid (after Collins and Lutz, 1991).

co-administration of phenytoin in multilumen catheters. These devices can be used
to reduce the need for frequent venipuncture and they provide a means of administering incompatible drugs. The study utilized an in vitro model flow system to
examine the physico-chemical phenomena that occurred when these two incompatible entities (phenytoin and TPN fluid) were simultaneously administered through
multicatheter systems into a circulating fluid (sodium chloride, sodium bicarbonate
and albumin in solution). Double- and triple-lumen catheters were used as shown
in Fig. 8. Video recordings were made of the drug flow and assays of phenytoin
concentration were performed on samples of the circulating fluid. White clouds of
phenytoin precipitation were seen near the tip of the double-lumen catheter, but
not in the triple-lumen device. Infusion through the former resulted in an average
of 65% loss of phenytoin which, on microscopic examination, appeared as spindleshaped crystals. In some cases, millimetre-size fragments were seen to dislodge
from the tip of the double-lumen catheter.
It was suggested that the interaction was due to the close proximity of the two
orifices at the end hole of the double-lumen catheter, which permitted mixing of
the two effusing streams of the incompatible agents. The staggered orifices of the
triple-lumen catheter reduced this interaction greatly, no crystals were observed,
although a thin coating of white film did form near the opening of the proximal
and middle side holes of the catheter. Although the authors recognized the value
of these multilumen devices, they did advise caution in their use, particularly in the
clinical setting with combinations of incompatible drugs. The best approach for
prevention of drug-drug incompatibility interactions is to use published information
on the physical and chemical properties of medicinal agents which are to be used

46

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

concomitantly and avoid their coming into direct contact. The pharmacist is the
best health professional to advise on this and the best source of current information
is the latest edition of Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia (31st edition, 1996).
ii. DRUG-CONTAINER/PACKAGINGINTERACTIONS
It is essential that pharmaceutical containers and packaging should not interact with
a drug product and, conversely, that the drug product should not interact with the
container or packaging. The two materials which are most widely used as containers
and packaging are glass and, more usually, plastics. Incompatibilities between drugs
and such materials have been well documented in the literature (D’Arcy, 1983;
McElnay et al., 1988; Taormina et al., 1992).
There are a number of mechanisms which are central to drug-containedpackaging interactions. These have been described by McElnay and Hughes (1996) as:
(a) Sorption: a term which describes both adsorption of a drug to a surface and
the absorption of a drug into the matrix of the container material.
(b) Leaching: the process by which components of the containedpackaging material
migrate into the medicine.
(c) Permeation: this process involves the transfer of drugs through the container/packaging material to the external surface. This can be followed by
evaporation of the drug.
(d) Polymer modification: some drugs can interact with the polymer and modify its
chemical structure; this may lead to changes in its physical properties.

i. Glass
Glass containers are particularly useful for liquid preparations due to their rigidity,
their superior protective qualities and their translucency allowing easy inspection
of the contents. Their disadvantages are weight and breakability.
For most drugs’ storage, ordinary soda glass or white flint glass containers are
used. Amber glass is used for light-sensitive drugs and its composition differs little
from white flint glass, except that a small proportion of iron oxide is added under
strongly reducing conditions, Although glass is more resistant to chemical attack
than other container materials, it is not entirely inert and, when it is in prolonged
contact with water, alkali tends to be extracted. Alkaline solutions attack glass
more rapidly than water, and the higher the alkali content of the glass the more
rapid is this effect. Thus, a glass of low alkali content must be used for containers
of preparations liable to attack glass.
Glass completely free from alkali is not practicable but with borosilicate glass,
such as Pyrex, the soda content is minimal (about 3.5%), the silica content is around
80% and the boric acid content is approximately 13%. Such glass is inert, neutral
and has a very high chemical and thermal resistance. It is, however, hard and more
difficult to process than glass with a higher alkali content.

DRUG INTERACTIONS IN VITRO

47

ii. Plastics
The term plastics covers a wide range of solid composite materials which are
usually based upon synthetic resins or upon modified polymers of natural origin and
possessing mechanical strength (Table 9). The physical, chemical and mechanical
properties of plastics’ materials are determined by their chemical structure,
molecular weight, the alignment of the resin and the type and concentration of
additives. Selection of the monomer, for example, ethylene, propylene, glucose,
vinyl chloride, determines the chemical structure and the type of substituents in
and/or on the polymer chain. Additives include plasticizers added to reduce brittleness, ultraviolet-ray absorbers to prevent degradation by light, and antioxidants and
lubricants which are sometimes needed for satisfactory processing. The monomer
residues and additives can leach out from the finished plastics materials and have
been the main cause of the adverse effects that have been reported.
Knowledge about drug interactions with plastics materials has advanced greatly
since the previous edition of this book was published. Information that has so far
appeared on the sorption of drugs to intravenous fluid containers, delivery sets,
syringes, filters or other plastics apparatus has highlighted that polyvinylchloride
(PVC) is the major offender in this respect (Allwood, 1983, 1990; D’Arcy, 1983).
Fortunately, in only a few cases, is this sorption phenomenon and loss of drug from
fluid likely to present a clinical hazard; in most instances methods are available to
prevent or overcome the problem, providing that it is first recognized.
Sorption is probably the most important mechanism for drug interactions with
container materials or packaging. Current information suggests that the following
drugs may exhibit clinically significant sorption to plastics materials: amiodarone,
chlormethiazole, diazepam, glyceryl trinitrate (nitroglycerin), insulin, isosorbide
dinitrate, lignocaine, vitamin A acetate, and a miscellaneous group of drugs including hydralazine hydrochloride, some phenothiazines, thiopentone sodium and warfarin sodium. In addition, some drugs alter the physical characteristics of plastics
materials, for example, the general anaesthetic gas, cyclopropane, is incompatible
with flexible plastics or rubber tubing; methoxyflurane, a volatile anaesthetic, is
significantly absorbed by the rubber in anaesthetic circuits and it partially solubilizes
PVC plastics. Paraldehyde has long been known to have a solvent action on rubber,
it also solubilizes polystyrene and styrene-acrylonitrile copolymer and should therefore not be injected with syringes made with these materials.
Chloroquine binds strongly to soda glass (60-90% bound) and to cellulose acetate
filters (58-64% bond) but not seemingly to borosilicate glass or to polycarbonate,
polypropylene, or polystyrene containers (Geary et al., 1983; Yahya et al., 1985).
These interactions can have serious implications in the laboratory estimation of
chloroquine resistance to the malaria parasite.
Kowaluk et al. (1981, 1982, 1983) have done much to investigate the extent of
drug-container interactions. They examined the stability of 46 injectable drugs
stored in PVC bags in the dark for periods of up to 3 months; drugs in glass vials
served as controls. Five of the drug products: chlormethiazole edisylate, diazepam,
hydralazine hydrochloride, thiopental sodium and warfarin sodium were lost from

48

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 9. POLYMER COMPOUNDS WHICH ARE WIDELY USED IN PLASTIC PHARMACEUTICAL PACKAGING AND
INTRAVENOUS ADMINISTRATION EQUIPMENT (AFTER YAHYA ET AL., 1986)
Chemical name

Plastic type

Repeating unit of the polymeric
structure of the plastic

CHz-OR

I

Cellulose acetate

Amorphous thermoplastic

-cH<cH-

O>

CH- 0

-

CH- CH

I

I

RO OR
R=H

CH2-OR

I

Cellulose propionate

Amorphous thermoplastic

a- 0 -

-cH<cH-o>
CH- CH

I

1

RO OR
R = -CO-C2H,

Ethylvinyl acetate

Amorphous thermoplastic

- CHZ-CHI

O-CO-CH~-CH~

Methacrylate butadiene
styrene

Amorphous thermoplastic

Polyethylene

Partially crystalline
thermoplastic
Partially crystalline
thermoplastic

Polypropylene

Co-polymer

Polystyrene

Crystalline thermoplastic

- CHa-FH

Polyvinylchloride

Amorphous thermoplastic

-CHZ-CH-

a
I

-

DRUG INTERACTIONS IN VITRO

49

solution to a substantial extent after 1 week. The main physiocochemical determinants controlling drug sorption appeared to be the extent of ionization and lipid
solubility of the drug.
In other studies, they added 45 drugs to intravenous fluids and drug loss was
studied after simulated infusion via plastics infusion sets, with and without burette
chambers, glass infusion bottles, polyethylene and silastic tubing with glass syringes
on an infusion pump, and all-plastics, single-use syringes. Chlormethiazole edisylate,
chlorpromazine hydrochloride, diazepam, promethazine hydrochloride, thiopental
sodium, thioridazine hydrochloride, and trifluoperazine were lost from solution
during infusion through at least one of the systems. The loss, with most drugs, was
slow, time dependent, and concentration dependent which indicated a diffusioncontrolled sorption process rather than a binding-absorptive process. Drug loss was
lowest in short lengths of small-diameter tubing with low permeability constants.
None of the drugs was lost when stored in all-plastics, single-use syringes.
There are two drugs for which sorption is a particular problem, insulin and
nitrates. A number of studies have shown the non-specific binding of insulin from
dilute solutions. This was first shown by Ferrebee et al. (1951) who showed that
the drug was strongly absorbed by laboratory glassware. Additional studies showed
that insulin also binds to siliconized glassware, paper and polypropylene and to
commercial burette intravenous administration sets, especially Sureset (methacrylate butadiene styrene burette and polybutadiene tubing) (see McElnay and Hughes
(1996) for references). This non-specific adsorption of insulin, which has been a
specific problem in plastic tubing in insulin pumps, can best be prevented by
administering the insulin via a small volume syringe via a syringe pump, since the
surface area is much reduced compared with the total amount of insulin present.
A number of studies have reported interaction of a range of vasodilator nitrates
(e.g. glyceryl trinitrate and isosorbide dinitrate) with packaging and intravenous
delivery equipment. A number of mechanisms are involved simultaneously, including adsorption, absorption and permeation. Studies by a number of groups (see
McElnay and Hughes (1996) for references) have confirmed that these nitrates are
removed from aqueous solutions and from dextrose and/or saline admixtures by
plastic materials, especially PVC where losses of up to 70% could be anticipated.
Losses with polyethylene did not exceed 15% under similar conditions (Hansen and
Spillum, 1991) and the use of Softbag containers (polypropylene-lined infusion bag)
did not show any sorption with glyceryl trinitrate, diazepam or warfarin sodium in
normal saline (Salomies et al., 1994).
Roberts et al. (1991) estimated the time course of the sorption of drugs using a
diffusional model in which the plastic was assumed to act as an infinite sink. This
model appeared to be suitable for estimation of storage relevant to clinical usage,
and enabled the magnitude of the uptake in a specified time to be described by a
single parameter known as the sorption number. The sorption number was defined
by the plastics-infusion solution partition coefficient, the diffusion coefficient in the
plastics material and the exposed surface area of the plastics. This sorption number
could be used to predict the effects of a number of factors (e.g. time, plastics surface

50

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Vitamin A

Nitroglycerin

If
0
Insulin

Chlormethiazole

k

Diazepam

t

Benzodiazepine

II

24

t

Ligmaine

t

4

!*h

Warfarin

Fig. 9. Time-scale for clinically significant losses of drug due to sorption to plastics materials
(Allwood, 1994).

area, solution volume and pH on fractional drug loss. Jenke (1993) developed a
similar model in which storage was a critical factor in predicting sorption. At long
storage times the infinite sink approach, as defined by Roberts et al. (1991), was
inaccurate, while at shorter storage times the sorption profile for a solute could be
estimated from its hexane-water and octanol-water partition coefficients via a
simple diffusion-based expression.
Not all sorption interactions are clinically significant. The schematic representation of an arbitrary time scale cited by McElnay and Hughes (1996) and reproduced
in Fig. 9 illustrates that those interactions occurring close to time are clinically
significant, whereas those occurring at the other end of the scale may be considered
insignificant.

a. Leaching
Leaching is the migration of substances from container/packaging materials into a
medicine. Examples are the leaching of alkali from soda-glass bottle, and the
leaching of zinc salts used as activators in rubber closures. Barium ions leached
from borosilicate glass may react with the sulphates of drugs such as kanamycin,
atropine or magnesium ions to form barium sulphate crystals, the presence of
sulphurous acid salts as antioxidants may also result in the formation of crystals in
solutions (Lund, 1994). Leaching of plastics components has also received much
attention (see McElnay and Hughes, 1996). PVC has been a particular problem,
with the plasticizer diethylhexylphthalate (DEHP) leaching from PVC bags induced
by various substances including Tween 20, Tween 80, polyoxyethylated castor oil,
polysorbate 80, and the vehicles used in paclitaxel and taxotere formulations. Paclitaxel, used in metastatic ovarian cancer, is formulated in 49% dehydrated alcohol
and polyoxyethylated castor oil, the latter being known to leach the plasticizer
(DEHP) from PVC infusion containers and intravenous administration sets (Pearson
and Trissel, 1993). It is therefore recommended that paclitaxel is used with nonPVC containing equipment (ABPI Data Sheet Compendium, 1994-95).
b. Permeation
Permeation is a combination of absorption followed by migration to the outer
surface, from which the drug is released by evaporation. Losses may be substantial
and continuous (Allwood, 1994). Permeation may also occur due to passage of
gases, vapours and liquids through packaging; water vapour permeates through

DRUG INTERACTIONS IN VITRO

51

silicone rubber and, to varying degrees, through plastics, particularly PVC and
polystyrene (Lund, 1994). One of us (PFD’A) observed such a phenomenon with
an experimental formulation of semi-solid laxative preparation filled into a plastics
tube. The idea was that travellers would find this useful by ingesting a measured
length of the extruded material. Unfortunately the purgative formulation permeated
the tube and caused a faecal colour staining. The project was dropped.
As has already been mentioned, the loss of glyceryl trinitrate from intravenous
fluid containers, particularly PVC, involves a degree of permeation through plastics
materials followed by a loss of evaporation. It was also common at one time to
provide an outer plastics envelope for plastic infusion bags; this reduced permeation
of the fluids.
c. Polymer ModiJication
Kowaluk et al. (1981) reported that PVC infusion bags containing chlormethiazole
became more pliable and softer on storage, particularly with high concentrations
of the drug. Both sorption and permeation was enhanced. It has been suggested
that this was due to greater PVC polymer chain flexibility through plasticization.
DRUG INTERACTION WITH CONTACT LENSES
A number of drugs can enter into surface interaction with plastics contact lenses.
For example, a permanent and damaging colouration of contact lenses has been
reported with the use of rifampicin (Lyons, 1979), and this is not entirely surprising
since this antibiotic is known to cause reddish discolouration of tears, urine and
sputum. It has also long been known that fluorescine stains soft lenses and may
permanently spoil them. Rose Bengal is also contraindicated, although the
concentrated dye may be removed from the lens material by repeated leaching
processes. Adrenochrome pigmentation associated with the use of adrenaline eye
drops has been reported to cause a dense brown colouration of the lens (Sugar,
1974). Sulphasalazine used in the treatment of colitis has been implicated in the
yellow staining of soft contact lenses (Riley et al., 1986). It is now commonplace
for those patients undergoing topical treatment with eye drops and who also wear
insertable lenses to be advised to remove their lenses for the duration of the
treatment. It is more difficult, however, to predict possible interactions in those
patients undergoing systemic therapy, and it is only through isolated reports in the
literature that patients can be warned of this possibility. Generally, little predictive
work has been done on this type of interaction.
DRUG-EXCIPIENT INTERACTIONS
A number of drug-excipient interactions are listed in The British Pharmaceutical
Codex (Lund, 1994). Interactions between catonic and anionic agents may be
particularly troublesome. For example, carmellose sodium, an anionic polymer,

52

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

precipitates large cations such as neomycin and chlorpromazine in solution. Benzalkonium chloride and other cationic antimicrobials are inactivated to a varying
degree in the presence of carbomer (carboxypolymethylene) and other anionic
polymers. The formation of complexes between drug and excipient may also be
common. Phenolic preservatives may be partly inactivated in complexes formed
with macrogol derivatives. The non-ionic povidone may complex with anionic or
cationic dyes, and drugs such as chlorpromazine and chloramphenicol and gels made
with povidone may increase in viscosity by complexing with 8-hydroxyquinoline
sulphate or thiomersal sodium.
Excipients may also affect the stability of a drug leading to reduced bioavailability
and reduced therapeutic efficacy, for example sodium metabisulphite rapidly inactivates cisplatin and propylene glycol, and macrogols catalyse the degradation of
benzoyl peroxide to benzoic acid and carbon dioxide. There are many such reports
and two recent examples are: the incompatibility of pryidoxine hydrochloride (vitamin B6) with mannitol, lactose and corn starch (Durig and Fassihi, 1993), and
the adverse effects of cellulose derivatives (methylcellulose and sodium carboxy
methylcellulose) on the stability and bioavailability of the anorectic, diethylpropion
(Gomez et al., 1993). Other examples of drug-excipient interactions have been
given by McElnay and Hughes (1996), while the 2nd edition of the Handbook of
Pharmaceutical Excipients (Wade and Weller, 1994) lists incompatibilities in the
majority of its monographs. All of these serve to illustrate that no component of
any formulation can be regarded as inactive. D’Arcy (1990) has discussed adverse
reactions to excipients in pharmaceutical formulations and has classified such excipients into classes and categories.

7. AGE AND GENETIC FACTORS

1. AGE
It has long been known that specific patient factors can influence the course of
therapy and the adverse drug reactions and interactions that may follow (Wallace
and Watanabe, 1977; Ouslander, 1981; Braverman, 1982; Greenblatt et al., 1982;
Shaw, 1982; D’Arcy and McElnay, 1983; Royal College of Physicians, 1984; Nolan
and O’Malley, 1988a,b; Denham, 1990; Williams and Lowenthal, 1992; McElnay
and D’Arcy, 1996). Of these factors, age and genetic influences have been pinpointed as significant contributors to problems with drug therapy.
It has long been established that elderly patients use more medicines than younger
age groups (Landahl, 1987; Sloan, 1992; Williams and Lowenthal, 1992; Stewart and
Cooper, 1994) and thus have a greater risk of experiencing a drug-drug interaction
(Kellaway and McCrae, 1973; Lawson and Jick, 1976; Levy et al., 1980; Williamson
and Chopin, 1980; Simons et al., 1992; Schenker and Bay, 1994; Stanton et al.,
1994; Stewart and Cooper, 1994). It must be understood, however, that there is
virtually no direct evidence in the literature that age per se can cause drug-drug
interactions. Its role is more in enhancing the effects of such interactions when they
occur. Age thus tends to exert a quantitative influence on the interaction but does
not alter its qualitative spectrum.
Senescence is frequently evoked to explain the unwanted sequelae to therapy,
undoubtedly rightly, providing senescence is regarded as being accompanied, for
example, by physiological changes due to age (Lamy, 1991), by small body mass,
poor renal function and impaired function of other organs, notably the liver. Table
10 shows some of the key changes that occur as a result of physiological ageing. In
elderly patients the reserve capacity of many organs may be considerably reduced,
and because of this erosion there is a narrowing of the safety margin between the
therapeutic and toxic dose of many drugs. As a result of this the elderly, as a group,
get rather more than their fair share of drug-induced disease and the complications
of drug-drug interactions.
Table 11 shows, as an example, the drug-drug interactions identified by Gosney
and Tallis (1984) in their survey of interacting drugs in elderly patients admitted to
hospital. Although none of these combinations were potentially life-threatening, 51
combinations were likely to lead to potentially serious side effects, and 27 were
significant in as much as they could lead to suboptimal treatment.
There are many striking examples of age-related alterations of both kinetics and
dynamics of drugs. Every drug used in the elderly should have its pharmacology

53

54

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 10. SOME KEY CHANGES AS A RESULT OF PHYSIOLOGICAL AGEING*
System

Key chanKes

Cardiovascular system

Decrease in cardiac output
Decrease in stroke volume
Loss of elasticity of blood vessels
Decrease in recovery rate to restore basal heart rate following exercise
Pre-disposition to blood hypercoagulability
Decrease in deposition of fibrin in blood vessel walls
Decrease in peripheral perfusion
Decrease in organ blood flow

Central nervous system

Changes in receptor and target organ sensitivity
Decrease in cerebral perfusion
Slowing of cerebral processes

Respiratory system

Decrease in the elasticity of lung tissue
Lessening of ciliary activity
Decrease in dead space in lungs
Decrease in forced expiratory volume
Decrease in peak flow
Wasting of muscles in diaphragm

Endocrine system

Decrease in glucose tolerance
Decrease in peripheral responsiveness to insulin
Decrease in thyroid functional activity but increased tissue sensitivity to
thyroid hormones
Decrease in normal thyroxine turnover
Reduction of plasma binding of thyroid hormones
Decrease in basal adrenal activity
Reduction of estrogen level
Decrease in the production of progesterone after menopause
Decrease in free androgens in men
Altered hormonal control of bone homeostasis
Compromized immunological systems

Gastrointestinal systems

Decrease in acid secretion
Decrease in gastric emptying rate
Decrease in gut motility
Decrease in peristaltic activity
Decrease in gastric blood flow
Decrease in absorption of calcium and iron from small intestine

Hepatic system

Reduction in hepatic blood flow
Decreased metabolic capacity

Genito-urinary system:
Kidney

Bladder
Reproductive tract
*Source: Collier et al. (1993).

Decrease in glomerular filtration rate
Decrease in functioning renal glomeruli
Decrease in renal blood flow
Decrease in excretory and reabsorptive capacities of renal tubules
Loss of supporting elastic tissue
Detrusor muscle hypertrophy
Decrease in vaginal secretions
Increase in pH of vaginal secretions

Table 11. DRUG INTERACTIONS*
Dr&)
Frusemide

Aminoglycosides

Frusemide
Warfarin
Warfarin
Heparin
Verapamil

Cephalosporins
Phenylbutazone
Aspirin
Aspirin
Propranolol
(within 6 h)
Frusemide
Prednisolone
(with potassium supplementation)
Frusemide
Prednisolone
(without potassium supplementation)

Nature of clinically most important
interaction
Increased ototoxicity and
nephrotoxicity
Increased nephrotoxicity
Increased risk of haemorrhage
Increased risk of haemorrhage
Increased risk of haemorrhage
Risk of asystole
Antagonism
Increased risk of potassium loss
as well as antogonism
(4 of these had K+ < 2.8 mmolll)
Antagonizes diuretic effect

Loop diuretics

Indomethacin

Loop diuretics

Phenytoin

Other non-steroidal
May antagonize diuretic effect
anti-inflammatory drugs
Spironolactone
Inhibition of ulcer healing.
Interference with treatment of
cardiac failure
Chlorpromazine
Increased risk of leucopenia
Antacid
Interference with action/absorption
Antacid
Interference with actionlabsorption
Antacid
Interference with action/absorption
Antacid
Interference with action/absorption
Iron
Interference with actionlabsorption
Co-trimoxazole
Interference with control. Increased
risk of bleeding
Co-trimoxazole
Potentiation

Phenylbutazone

Thyroxine

Tolbutamide

Co-trimoxazole

Carbenoxolone
Phenylbutazone
Iron
Cimetidine
Digoxin
Tetracycline
Tetracycline
Warfarin

'Source: Gosney and Tallis (1984).

Interference with thyroid function
test
Potentiation

Comment

No.
cases
~~

Potentially serious. Probably avoidable

24

Potentially serious. Probably avoidable
Potentially dangerous. Avoidable
Potentially dangerous. Avoidable
Potentially dangerous. Avoidable
Potentially dangerous. Avoidability uncertain

9
1
3
1
2

Significant interaction.
Avoidability uncertain
Potentially serious. Risk could have been
reduced by potassium supplementation

16

Possibly serious. Could have been avoided by using
alternative analgesic
Possibly significant. Avoidability uncertain

4

15

Potentially significant. Should have been avoided

1

Potentially dangerous. Avoidable
Possibly significant. Avoidable
Possibly significant. Avoidable
Possibly significant. Avoidable

2
2
20

Significant. Avoidable
Significant. Avoidable
Significant. Could have been avoided by using
trimethroprim alone
Possibly significant. Could have been avoided by
using trimethroprim alone
Possibly significant. Avoidable

3
2

%

5

%

l

g

Possibly significant. Could have been avoided by
using trimethroprim alone
Total

2

E

133

vI
vI

14

5

1

8
U

9

0

0

56

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

and toxicology specially evaluated in the elderly, yet few elderly patients, if any,
participate in clinical trials on new drug substances. One does not question that it
is desirable, but it must be appreciated that the ethical situation is not at all clear.
Pharmacokinetic effects of medication may be increased or decreased in the
elderly patient. Posner and Rolan (1994) have categorized age-related differences
in kinetics between the elderly and young as being primarily due to diminished
renal function, altered proportions of body fat and water, reduced cardiac output
and some degree of altered hepatic metabolism. Ritschel (1980) has listed some of
the changes of drug parameters in the aged, these are given in Table 12, while
Greenblatt et al. (1982) have summarized the relation of age to the clearance of
drugs by hepatic biotransformation (Table 13).
Pharmacodynamic interactions between drugs produce similar or antagonistic
pharmacological effects or side effects. These interactions can be influenced by age
as illustrated in the following examples:
The elderly show an increased response to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors; they show a reduced responsiveness to propranolol. Data are conflicting
for calcium antagonists. The inotropic effect of theophylline is increased with age,
but its bronchodilator effect is reduced. The anticoagulant effect of warfarin is
increased in elderly patients due to greater fragility of the hepatic synthesis of
clotting factors (Shephard et al., 1977). This latter increase is important because
warfarin is a drug which is notorious for its involvement in drug interactions and
therefore this increased warfarin sensitivity could predispose the elderly patient to
greater adverse sequelae should an interaction take place.
Feely and Coakley (1990) emphasized in their review on altered pharmacodynamics in the elderly that the importance of age-related changes in drug sensitivity is
being increasingly appreciated. The type, intensity and duration of drug action can
be affected, ranging from therapeutic failure to major drug toxicity.
McElnay and D’Arcy (1996) have listed other examples of the pharmacodynamics
of drugs being altered in the elderly patient. Alterations in physiological and homeostatic systems including the autonomic nervous system, baroreceptors, thermoregulation and balance have been described. Phenothiazines, diuretics, antihypertensives,
P-adrenoceptor antagonists, antidepressants, NSAID, benzodiazepine and lignocaine are all examples of drugs that are likely to produce enhanced pharmacological
or toxic effects in the elderly.
The sequelae of interactions involving these drugs or systems will be qualitatively
similar in the different age groups but will be more pronounced in their effects on
the elderly. Many adverse effects of drugs or drug combinations that may simply
be a nuisance to younger patients are much more intensified in the elderly due, for
example, to their decreased resistance to the adverse consequences. Indeed, the
adverse effects of drug treatments may convert the elderly patient from a sentient
human being into a chair-fast incontinent wreck.
A number of investigators have shown that age is not an independent risk factor
for drug interactions (Nolan and O’Malley, 1989; Carbonin et al., 1991; Gurwitz
and Avorn, 1991; Chrischilles et al., 1992). However, regardless of whether the

AGE AND GENETIC FACTORS

57

Table 12. CHANGE OF DRUG PARAMETERS IN THE AGED*
Drug

Biological half-life

Volume of
distribution

Acetaminophen (paracetamol)
Acetanilide
Aminopyrine
Amitriptyline
Amobarbital
Ampicillin
Antipyrine (phenazone)
Aspirin
Carbenicillin
Carbenoxolone
Cefamandole
Cefazoline
Cefradin
Chlordiazepoxide
Chlormethiazole
Chlorthalidone
Cimetidine
Cyclophosphamide
Desipramine
Desmethyldiazepam
Diazepam
Digoxin
Dihydrostreptomycin
Doxycycline
Flurbiprofen
Gentamicin
Imipramine
Indomethacin
Indoprofen
Kanam ycin
Levomepromazine
Lidocaine (lignocaine)
Lithium
Lorazepam
Methotrexate
Metoprolol
Morphine
Netilmicin
Nitrazepam
Nortript yline
Oxazepam
Penicillin G
Phenobarbital
Phenylbutazone
Phenytoin
Procaine penicillin
Practolol
Propicillin
Propranolol
Protript yline
Quinidine
Spironolactone
Sulbenicillin
Sulfamethizole (sulphasomidine)
Tetracycline

t
t
t
t
t
t
t
NI
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
U
t
t
t
U
t
t
t

U

NI
Uor t

t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
NI
t
t
t
t
t
t
T
t
t
t

1
NI
1
U
U

1
t
t
1
t

U
U

t
t
U
1
t
NI
t
t
1

Total clearance

1

U
NI

1
1
1
1
1
NI
1
U
1
1
1
1
1
1

NI
NI

1

Uor 1

1

NI
U
U

NI

NI
NI
U
NI
U

NI
NI
U

1

t
NI
1
1

NI
NI
U

1

U

1

1

1

U

1

Uor 1

1

NI
NI

1

U
U

t

NI
NI
U
NI
NI

1

NI
NI
NI

1

t

1
1
1
1

NI
NI
NI

NI

NI
NI

1

t

Uor 1
NI

1
1
1
1

NI

58

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 12. CONTINUED
Drug

Biological half-life

Volume of
distribution

Theophylline
Thioridazine
Tobramycin
Tolbutamide
Warfarin

t
t
t
t
t

Uor j
NI

c
c

U

Total clearance

c
c
e
c

NI

*Source: Ritschel (1980).

Table 13. STUDIES ON THE RELATION OF AGE TO THE CLEARANCE OF DRUGS BY HEPATIC
BIOTRANSFORMATION*

Drug or metabolite

Initial pathway of biotransformationa

Evidence suggests age-related
reduction in clearance
Antipyrineb (phenazone)
Diazepamb
Chlordiazepoxide
Desmethyldiazepamb
Desalkylflurazepamb
Clobazamb
Alprazolamb
Quinidineb
Theophylline
Propranolol
Nortriptyline

Oxidation (OH, DA)
Oxidation (DA)
Oxidation (DA)
Oxidation (OH)
Oxidation (OH)
Oxidation (DA)
Oxidation (OH)
Oxidation (OH)
Oxidation
Oxidation (OH)
Oxidation (H)

Small or negligible age-related
change in clearance
Oxazepam
Lorazepam
Temazepam
Warfarin
Lidocaine (lignocaine)
Nitrazepam
Flunitrazepam
Isoniazid
Ethanol
Metroprolol
Digitoxin
Prazosin

Glucuronidation
Glucuronidation
Glucuronidation
Oxidation (OH)
Oxidation (DA)
Nitroreduction
Oxidation (DA), nitroreduction
Acetylation
Oxidation (alochol dehydrogenase)
Oxidation
Oxidation
Oxidation

Data conflicting or not definitive
Meperidine (pethidine)
Phenylbutazone
Phenytoin
Imipramine
Amitript yline
Acetaminophen (paracetamol)
Amobarbital

Oxidation (DA)
Oxidation (OH)
Oxidation (OH)
Oxidation (OH, DA)
Oxidation (OH, DA)
Glucuronidation, sulfation
Oxidation (OH)

*Source: Greenblatt et al. (1982).
"OH denotes hydroxylation and DA dealkylation.
bEvidence suggests that the age-related reduction in clearance is greater in men than in women.

/
ACETYL CO A.

I
t

*INHERITED DISORDER
Biochemical defect in porphyria believed
to be an excessive activity of ALA SynlhehSe,
the rate controlling enzyme of the synthesis.
Various forms of disease probably due to
disturbances lower down chain resulting
from overactivity of ALA synthetase.

Acetylating mechanisms
(Acetylcholine)

1

/

Other metabolic pathways

presence of

SUCCINYL CO A.+GLYCINE

pyridoxal

+I

phosphate

-

I

t

condensation

PORPHOEILINOGEN(PEG)

/

oc AMINO-0-OX0 ADlPlC ACID
loss of CO? tinder influence of ALA synthetase

&AMINO LAEVULINIC ACID (ALAI

two

under influence
of aminnlaevulale
dehyrlralase
Four molecules of
PEG under influence IN~ERMEDIATE PRODUCTS
of porphobilinogenase
combine

UroporphyrinogenI

1

1-

Uroporphyrin I

I

Urine 100 pg porphyrinlday

CoproporphyrinogenI

\

dehydrogenation
i
-Uroporphyrin
--111
UROPORPHYRINOGEN 111

c

I
I

-

decarboxylation

300mg/day formed
dehydrogenation

I

I

/

(TYPE 111)

CWROPORPHYRINOGEN111

decarboxylation

enzyme (errochelatase

PROTOPORPHYRINOGENIX
dehydrogenation

PROTOPORPHYRIN
MyoGobin

Fig. 10. Overall scheme of porphyrin synthesis (source: Fletcher and Griffin, 1986).

Excretionoftype 111 porphyrins
in urine and laecgs increases
in diseases of lwer and in
haemolyticanaemia.

60

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 14. DRUGS CLASSIFIED AS TO THEIR ASSOCIATION WITH PORPHYRIA*
Drugs believed not to precipitate porphyria

Potentially porphyrogenic drugs
Alcohol
Alphaxalone
Aluminium
2 allyloxy-3 methylbenzamide
Amidopyrine (A)
Aminoalutethemide
Amitriit yline
Amphetamines
Androgens (A, C)
Apronalide
Azapyrazone
Azapropazone

Barbiturates (A, C)
Bemegride
Busulphan
Carbromal
Carbamazepine
Chlorambucil
Chloramphenicol
Chlordiazepoxide (A)
Chlormezanone
Chloroform
Chloroquine (C)
Chlormethiazole
Chlorpropamide (A, C)
Cimetidine
Clonazepam
Clonidine
Cocaine
Colistin
Cyclophosphamide
Danazol
Dapsone
Diazepam
Dichloralphenazone (A)
Diclofenac
Diethylhexyl phthalate
Diethylpropion
Dimenh ydrinate
Enflurane
Ergot preparations
Erythromycin
Ethchlorvynol
Ethinamate
Ethosuximide
Etomidate
Eucalypt01
Flufenamic acid
Flunitrazepam
Fluroxine
Frusemide

Acetazolamide
Adrenaline
Alclofenac
Amitripty line
Aspirin
Atropine
B vitamins (except pyridoxine)
Bethanidine
Biguanides
Bromides
Bumetanide
Bupivacaine
Buprenorphine
Cephalexin
Cephalosporins
Chloral hydrate
Chloramphenicol
Chlormethiazole
Chlorpheniramine
Chlorpromazine
Chloroquine
Chlorthiazides
Clobazam
Clofibrate
Clonazepam
Codeine
Colchicine
Corticosteroids
Cyclizine
Cyclopropane
Dexamethazone
Diamorphine
Diazepam
Diazoxide
Digitalis compounds
Diphenhydramine
Dicoumarol anticoagulants
Disopyramide
Domperidone
Droperidol
EDTA
Ether (diethyl)
Fentanyl
Flurbiprofen
Fusidic acid
Gentamicin
Glipizide
Guanethidine
Heparin

AGE AND GENETIC FACTORS

Table 14. CONTINUED
Potentially porphyrogenic drugs

Drugs believed not to precipitate porphyria

Glutethimide
Gold preparations
Griseofulvin (A)

Hydralazine
Hyoscine

Halothane
Hydantoins (phenytoin, ethotoin, mephentoin)
Hydralazine
Hydrochlorthiazide
Hyoscine N-butyl bromide
Imipramine
Indomethacin
Isoniazid
Isopropylmeprobamate
Lignocaine
Mefenamic acid
Mephenazine
Meprobamate
Mercury compounds
Methoxyflurane
Methsuximide
Methyldopa
Methypry lone
Metoclopramide
Metyr apone
Metronidazole
Nalidixic acid
Nikethamide
Novobiocin
Nitrazepam
Nitrofurantoin
Oral contraceptives
Oxazolidinediones
(paramethadione and trimethadione)
Oestrogens (A, C )
Oxazepam
Pancuronium
Paraldehyde
Pargyline
Pentazocine
Pentylenetetrazol
Pethidine
Phenazone
Ph ene1zin e
Phenoxybenzamine
Phensuximide
Phenylbutazone
Phenylhydrazine
Primidone
Probenecid

Ibuprofen
Imipramine
Indomethacin
Insulin
Ketamine
Ketoprofen
Labetolol
Lithium
Lorazepam
Mandelamine
Mecamylamine
Mec1ozin e
Mefenamic acid
Mersalyl
Metformin
Methadone
Methenamine mandelate
Methylphenidate
Morphine
Naproxen
Neostigmine
Nitrofurantoin
Nitrous oxide
Nortript yline
Oxazepam
Oxpentifylline

Paracetamol
Paraldehyde
Penicillamine
Penicillins
Pethidine
Phenformin
Pheniramine
Phenothiazines
(e .g , chlorpromazine)
Phenoperidine
Phenylbutazone
Prednisolone
Procaine
Prilocaine
Promethazine
Propantheline bromide
Propanidid
Primaquine
Propoxyphene
Propranolol
Prostigmine

61

62

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 14. CONTINUED
Potentially porphyrogenic drugs

Drugs believed not to precipitate porphyria

Progestogens (A, C )
Propanidid
Pyrazinamide
Pyrazolones (antipyrine,
isopropylantipyrine, dipyrone
sodium phenyl dimethyl
pyrazolone)
Pyridoxine
Pyrimethamine

Pyrimethamine

Ranitidine
Rifampicin
Sodium valproate
Spironolactone
Steroids
Streptomycin
Succinimides (ethosuximide,
methsuximide, phensuximide)
Sulphonal
Sulphonamides (A)
Sulphonylureas
Sulthiame
Tetracyclines
Theophylline
Tolazamide
Tolbutamide (A, C)
Tranylcypromine
Trional
Troxidone

Quinine
Reserpine
Resorcinol
Rifampicin
Streptomycin
Succinylcholine
Tetracyclines
Tetraethylammonium
bromide
Thiouracils
Tricyclic antidepressants
(amitriptyline)
Trifluoperazine
Thiazides
Tripelennamine
Tubocurarine
Sodium valproate

Vitamin C

Valproic acid
Viloxazine
Xylocaine
A, acute porphyria; C, cutaneous porphyria.
Substances marked in italics have been variously described as causing porphyria or being safe to administer to patients
with porphyria (see text).
‘Source: Fletcher and Griffin (1986).

elderly are more sensitive to the adverse effects of medication, they have more
disease, consume more medicines and are over-represented in nearly every study
of adverse drug reactions (Schneider et al., 1992).
GENETIC FACTORS
The term ‘pharmacogenetic disorder’ was originally coined by Vogel (1959) and
was originally limited to hereditary disorders revealed solely by the use of drugs.
Its meaning has now been enlarged to embrace all genetic contributions to the
considerable variation that exists in the interaction between the human or animal
subject and the pharmacological agents that are administered. The term can there-

AGE AND GENETIC FACTORS

Table 15. DRUGS REPORTED TO INDUCE HAEMOLYSIS IN SUBJECTS WITH G6PD DEFICIENCY
Haemolysis
Drug

Black subjects

Acetanilide
Dapsone
Furazolidone
Nitrofural
Nitrofurantoin
Sulphanilamide
Sulphapyridine
Sulphacetamide
Salazosulphapyridine
Sulphamethoxypyridazine
Thiazosulphone
Quinidine
Primaquine
Pamaquine
Pentaquine
Quinocide
Naphthalene
Neoarsphenamine
Phenylhydrazine
Toluidine blue
Trinitrotoluene

+++++
++
++
++++
++
+++
+++
++
+++
++
++
+++
++++
+++
+++
+++
++
+++
++++

Caucasian subjects

+++

++
+++
++
+++

++
+++

+++

Table 16. ADVERSE REACTIONS DUE TO POOR MICROSOMAL OXIDATION"
Adverse reaction

Drugs concerned

Lactic acidosis
Agranulocytosis

Met formin
Carbimazole
Phenylbutazone
Chlorpromazine
Nortriptyline
Imipramine
Thioridazine
Captopril

Neuropathy or sensory disturbances

Ph en ytoin

Hepatic adenoma
Cerebellar signs

Oral contraceptives
Ph en ytoin

Vitamin D-deficiency-like state

Phenytoin
Phenobarbitone

Folate deficiency-like state

Phenytoin
Phenobarbitone

Syncope
Malignant ventricular arrhythmias

Prazosin
Mexiletine
Disopyramide

Bradycardia

Propranolol
Metoprolol

*Source: Smith and Shah (1984, personal communication) and Smith and Idle (1981).

63

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

8. HERBAL AND OTHER
NON-ORTHODOX REMEDIES
Medicines derived from plants formed the majority of the earlier materia medica
because chemically synthesized compounds were then not available. Many of these
herbs have stood the test of time and critical clinical assessment and have found
their way into the pharmacopoeias of orthodox medicines sometimes as the isolated
and chemically standardized active ingredient, Such drugs as cocaine, colchicine,
coumarin anticoagulants, digoxin, ephedrine, morphine, quinine and quinidine,
reserpine, tubocurarine, sennosides and the ergot and vinca alkaloids entered orthodox medicinal use by this route. (De Smet and D’Arcy, 1996).
There are many types of herbal remedies (Table 17). At one end of the scale
there are the self-made teas prepared from self-collected herbs. At the other end
there are officially registered drug products which have passed through a rigid
registration procedure. In between there are a bewildering range of nostrums that
have obscure origins and even more obscure constituents. The latter classes may
be a mixture of herbal products with other ingredients of non-herbal origin (e.g.
arsenic or lead) or undeclared Western drugs (e.g. corticosteroids, non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory/antirheumatic agents (NSAIDs) , or paracetamol). Although herbal medicines are by far the largest component of non-orthodox remedies, they do
not have exclusive claims. Other non-orthodox remedies range from preparations
of animal origin, minerals, vitamins and amino acids; many of which are capable
of interfering with orthodox medicines.
A survey by Wharton and Lewith (1986) showed that only 5% of British doctors
claimed more than a poor knowledge of herbal medicines. Medical practitioners
generally believed that herbal preparations were residues from the remote past,
that they were harmless and largely ineffective. Many patients believed that they
were safe, simply because they were natural products, and that they were often
miraculously effective. Unfortunately both patients and doctors are misinformed
since many herbal products can be exceedingly toxic and may indeed present
peculiar hazard if taken in combination with orthodox medicines. A special section
has been given to this topic in the Tables of Drug Interactions that appear in Part
2 of this book. More detailed information of the nature and mechanisms of these
interactions has been given in a series of reviews by D’Arcy (1991, 1993), De Smet
(1992a,b), De Smet and D’Arcy (1996) and books by De Smet et al. (1992, 1993).
Some of these interactions are based upon a firm pharmacological basis (Table
18), but often their clinical relevance still needs to be established. Others have been
presented in anecdotal reports with lack of data essential to establish a firm causeeffect relationship. It is necessary to emphasize this if warnings are to be given

65

66

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 17. DIFFERENT TYPES OF HERBAL REMEDIES*

Raw materials for self-preparation
By self-collection
Through commercial channels
(Semi) finished non-medicinal products
Dietary supplements
Health foods
Recreational herbs, etc
Registered medicines
By special procedure
By regular procedure
*Source: De Smet and D’Arcy (1996)

Table 18. HERBAL DRUGS WITH WELL-KNOWN CONSTITUENTS AND THEIR INTERACTIONS*
Herbal drug

Interactions

Adonis vernalis
Convallaria majalis
Digitalis species

Due to the presence of cardioactive glycosides, digitalis-like effects and
potentiation of toxicity are possible.

Nerium oleander
Strophanthus species
Urginea maritima
Xsymalobium undulatum

Although Crataegus extracts do not contain digitalis-like glycosides,
potentiation of digitalis activity has been reported to occur in guinea
pigs. The evidence from this study has been challenged.

Atropa belladonna
Datura stramonium
Hyoscyamus niger
Mandragora officinarum
Scopalia carniolica

All these plants contain anticholinergic tropane alkaloids such as
hyoscyamine andlor scopolamine which can potentiate the effects of
synthetic drugs with similar pharmacological activity (e.g.
antidepressants, antihistamines, antispasmodics).

Ephedra species

The tertiary alkaloid epdedrine could interfere with conventional
antihypertensive therapy.

Papaver somniferum

The opium alkaloids of the oriental poppy will interact with and
potentiate the effects of analgesics and other CNS depressants.

Pilocarpus pennatifolius

The alkaoid pilocarpine has potent cholinergic effects which may
antagonize orthodox treatment with anti-asthma and anticholinergic
agents.

Rauwolfia serpentina

The reserpine-rescinnamide alkaloids of this root will interact and
potentiate the effects of antihypertensives, psychotropics and CNS
depressants.

‘Source: De Smet and D’Arcy (1996).

about likely interactions since the sparse reports of drug interactions between nonorthodox products and Western medicines neither confirms their safety in use nor
indeed suggest that the incidence of interactions is small. The simple fact is that
most interactions of this type will not be recognized as such by the self-medicated
patient and will not be reported to an orthodox medical practitioner and therefore
will not appear in the medical or pharmaceutical literature. In many of the cases
where herbal products have been associated with actual human poisoning, analysis

HERBAL AND OTHER NON-ORTHODOX REMEDIES

67

has shown that this was not in fact caused by the herbs alleged to be in the
product, but resulted from substitution or contamination of the declared ingredients,
intentionally or by accident, with a more toxic botanical, a poisonous metal, or a
potent non-herbal drug substance (De Smet, 1992a).

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

9. INTERFERENCE WITH LABORATORY
TESTING
Laboratory tests, physical examination and the patients medical history often provide the main key to accurate diagnosis and to subsequent rational therapy. One
of these key features - laboratory tests - can be influenced in sensitivity or
specificity (or both) by the drugs consumed by the patient. Frequently the influence
of medication on the reliability of subsequent laboratory tests is not realized or
merely overlooked. The mechanisms of such interactions can be generally classified
into two areas: pharmacological and methodological interferences. Whenever a
drug-laboratory test interaction is established it should be communicated to the
medical community so that they may avoid possible errors in diagnosis.
Many factors can cause a laboratory error or false-positive results. They include
human error, equipment error, environmental changes, chemicals added to specimens and the presence of endogenous substances. Another important factor which
has an effect is the presence of medications in the body fluid tested or influencing
the functions of the body. This last factor, medication, is often overlooked. This
topic of interactions involving laboratory tests has not been covered specifically in
this volume, however, an excellent and authoritative review has recently been
written by Yosselson-Superstine (1996) while other compilations of published
studies have been prepared by Salway (1990) and Young (1990).
In general, such interference can be classified into two major types: (1) pharmacological interferences, also known as biological or in vivo interferences, and (2)
methodological interferences also known as analytical or in vitro interferences.
Pharmacological interferences are by far the most frequent type. They affect the
result of the tests by virtue of the activity of the drug or its metabolites in the body,
regardless of the method employed in the test. This is easy to detect when the
change in the test value is expected, but it is more difficult to interpret when it is
an unexpected toxicological effect of the drug.
A simple example to illustrate this type of interference is in tests that measure
the glycaemic control of diabetic patients. Thiazide diuretics can elevate blood sugar
levels from weeks to years after therapy is started (Joseph and Schuna, 1990) and
this can seriously affect the blood sugar levels of some patients taking, for example,
sulphonylurea hypoglycaemics. The mechanism involved in this interference could
be due to the hypokalaemia induced by the diuretic or even to the possible inhibition
of insulin secretion from the pancreatic p-cells.
An example of methodological interference is that with colour. Most of the
laboratory tests in chemical pathology have a colourimetric component which can
be subject to the effect of foreign chromagens. Creatinine measurement is one of

69

70

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 19. DRUGS WHICH MAY DISCOLOUR URINE*
Drugldrug class

Colour produced

Acetanilide
Aloe
Aminopyrine
Aminosalicylic acid
Amitriptyline
Anisindione
Antipyrine
Azuresin
Cascara

Yellow to red
Yellow-pink to red-brown in alkaline urine
Red
Discolouration red in hypochlorite solution
Blue-green
Pink or red to red brown in acidic urine, orange in alkaline urine
Red-brown
Blue or green
Yellow-brown in acidic urine, yellow-pink in alkaline urine,
turning black on standing
Rust yellow to brown
Orange or purplish red
Green
Pink to red or red-brown in alkaline urine
Red
Reddish
Reddish due to haemoglobinuria
Orange in alkaline urine
Red
Pink to red or red-brown in alkaline urine
Orange to orange-brown
Black
Rust yellow to brown
Red
Blue or green
Green due to biliverdinaemia
Black
Dark on standing in hypochlorite solution
Dark to brown, black-green on standing
Dark on standing in hypochlorite solution
Blue or green
Dark
Dark blue or green
Rust yellow to brown
Rust yellow to brown
Dark brown to black on standing
Orange to orange-red
Orange-red in alkaline urine
Pink to purplish-red in alkaline urine
Pink to red in alkaline urine
Pink to red or red-brown
Pink to red or red-brown
Pink to red or red-brown
Rust yellow to brown
Green
Green
Deep yellow in acidic urine
Brown to black
Dark green
Yellow fluorescence
Bright red-orange
Yellow in acidic urine, pink in alkaline urine
Yellow-brown in acidic urine, pink to red in alkaline urine,
brown on standing
Orange-yellow in alkaline urine
Rust yellow to brown

Chloroquine
Chlorzoxazone
Cimetidine (injection)
Danthron
Daunorubicin
Deferoxamine mesylate
Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)
Diphadione
Doxorubicin
Emodin
Ethoxazena
Ferrous salts
Furazolidone
Idarubicin
Indigotindisulfonate
Indomethacin
Iron sorbitex
Levodopa
Methocarbamol
Methyldopa
Methylene blue
Metronidazole
Mitoxantrone
Nitrofurantoin
Pamaquine
Phenacetin
Phenazopyridine
Phenindione
Phenolphthalein
Phenolsulphonphthalein (PSP)
Phenothiazines
Phensuximide
Phenytoin
Primaquine
Promethazine (injection)
Propofol (injection)
Quinacrine
Quinine
Resorcinol
Riboflavin
Rifampicin
Santonin
Senna
Sulphasalazine
Sulphonamides (antibacterial)

INTERFERENCEWITH LABORATORY TESTING

71

Table 19. CONTINUED*
Drugldrug class

Colour produced

Thiazolsulfone
Tolonium
Triamterene
Warfarin

Pink or red
Blue-green
Pale blue fluorescence
Orange

"Source: Yosselson-Superstine (1996).

the most valuable laboratory tools in clinical practice. Not only does it provide an
excellent estimation of the patients kidney function, but it also serves as a guide to
dosage adjustments of drugs whose elimination is mainly by the renal route. Colouration of urine can greatly impede the reliability of this measurement.
Two major techniques are used today for the analysis of creatinine: colourimetric
and enzymatic. The colourimetric method is based on Jaffk's reaction (Jaffk, 1886)
in which saturated picric acid reacts with creatinine in an alkaline medium. This is
still in common for the determination of creatinine in serum or urine and is employed in many reagent kits, such as Beckman ASTRA-8, Technicon SMAC and
Du Pont ACA. The coloured end product of the reaction absorbs light between
490 and 520 nm and is measured by spectrophotometer. The Jaffk reaction is
influenced by non-creatinine chromagens in the samples (Narayanan and Appleton,
1980). These chromagens can be physiological substances such as glucose or protein
and also medications like specific cephalosporins (cefoxitin, cephalothin, cafazolin),
penicillins, lactulose, high-dose frusemide, methyldopa, acetohexamide, and phenacemide. The many publications on the interferences of these medications, and
especially cephalosporins with the Jaffe analysis have been extensively evaluated in
a review by Ducharme et al. (1993).
Other examples of both classes of interferences have been given by YosselsonSuperstine (1996) in her comprehensive review. In previous times, physicians considered that the visual examination of urine was a considerable diagnostic aid, indeed
they were cartooned as 'Piss-pot prophets'. It is fortunate therefore that they did
not have to cope with todays plethora of drugs which discolour urine (Table 19).
Immunoassays are gaining more use as methods of choice in biochemical and
analytical laboratories, for instance in deposition studies for biotechnology products
or in therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) (Bottorff and Stewart, 1986). Various
types of immunoassays are employed, the most frequently used being the homogenous enzyme multiplied immunotechnique (EMIT), enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) , radioimmunoassay (RIA) and fluorescence immunoassay (FIA) .
All of these assays involve antigen-antibody reactions, so one important mechanism
of drug interference with these methods is that involving non-specificity of antibodies
(Yosselson-Superstine, 1996). This has been particularly troublesome with the assay
of digoxin due to the cross-reactivity of digoxin metabolites and the presence of
endogenous digoxin-like immunoreactive substances in the serum. These substances
accumulate in the blood, especially in neonates, during the third trimester of pregnancy and in renal failure and liver disease (Morris et al., 1990).
Two metabolites of the diuretic spironolactone, canrenone and its 20-hydroxy

72

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

derivative have more cross-reactivity with digoxin than the parent drug (Huffman,
1974; Silber et al., 1979; Morris et al., 1987). Endogenous steroids are also known
to cross-react with digoxin (Soldin et al., 1984; Gault et al., 1985) as also Fab
fragments infused into patients with digoxin toxicity (Natowicz and Shaw, 1991).
Yosselson-Superstine (1996) has described the procedures that are currently being
used to reduce this analytical interference, these procedures follow the guidelines
drawn up by the Expert Panel on Drug Effects in Clinical Chemistry of the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry (Galteau and Siest, 1984).

REFERENCES TO PART 1
ABPI Data Sheet Compendium, (1994-5) Taxol, Data Pharm Publications, London, pp.
315-316.
Aggeler PM, O’Reilly RA, Leong L, Kowitz PE. (1967) Potentiation of anticoagulant effects
of warfarin by phenylbutazone. N Engl J Med 276, 496-501.
Allwood MC. (1983) Sorption of drugs to intravenous delivery systems. Pharm Int 4, 83-85.
Allwood MC. (1990) Adverse reactions to parenterals. In: Florence AT, Salole EG. (eds)
Formulation factors in adverse reactions. Wright (Buttenvorth), London, pp. 56-74.
Allwood MC. (1994) Drug stability and intravenous administration, 2nd edn. Clinical pharmacy practice guide. UKCPA, University of Leeds Media Service, Leeds.
Almond MK, Taylor D , Kelsey BM, Cunningham J. (1994) Treatment of erythropoietin
resistance with cyclosporin. Lancet 343, 916-917.
Baruzzi A, Contin M, Perucca E , Albani F, Riva R. (1986) Altered serum protein binding
of carbamazepine in disease states associated with an increased al-acidic glycoprotein
concentration. Eur J Clin Pharmacol31, 85-89.
Basu TV. (1988) Drug nutrient interactions. Croom Helm, London.
Bennett PN. (1993) Evaluation of toxicity in human subjects. In: Ballantyne S, Marra T,
Turner P. (eds) General and applied toxicology, vol 1. Macmillan, Basingstoke, pp. 367384.
Belpaire FM, Wynant P, Van Trappen P, Dhont M, Verstraete A, Bogaert MG. (1995)
Protein binding of propranolol and verapamil enantiomers in maternal and foetal serum.
Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 190-193.
Bergrem H , Ritland S, Opendal I , Bergran A . (1983) Prednisolone pharmacokinetics and
protein binding in patients with portosystemic shunt. Scand J Gastroenterol 18, 273-276.
Bijvoet OLM, Fleisch HA, Canfield RE, Russell RGG (eds). (1995) Biophosphonate on
bones. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Black SD. (1993) Cytochrome P450 structure and function. In: Schenkman JB, Greim H
(eds) Cytochrome P4.50. Springer, Berlin, pp. 156-168.
Boman G, Hanngren A, Malmborg A, Borgfi, Sjoqvist F. (1971) Drug interaction: decreased
serum concentrations of rifampicin when given with PAS. Lancet i, 800.
Bottorff MB, Stewart CF. (1986) Analytical techniques and quality control. In: Taylor WJ,
Diers Caviness MH. (eds) A textbook for the clinical applications of therapeutic drug
monitoring. Abbott Laboratories, Texas, USA, pp. 51-57.
Brater DC, Kaojarern S, Benet LZ, Lin ET, Lockwood T, Morris RC, McSherry EJ,
Melmon KL. (1980) Renal excretion of pseudoephedrine. Clin Pharmacol Ther 28, 690694.
Braverman AM. (1982) Therapeutic considerations in prescribing for elderly patients. Eur J
Rheumatol Inframm 5, 288-293.
Braybrooks MP, Barry BW, Abbs ET. (1975) The effect of mucin on the bioavailability of
of tetracycline from the gastrointestinal tract: in vivo, in vitro correlation. J Pharm PharmaC O 27,
~
508-515.
Bree F, Urien S, Nguyen P, Riant P, Albengres E , Tillement JP. (1990) A re-evaluation of
the HSA-piroxicam interaction. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacol 15, 303-307.
Brodie LMJ, Boobis D. (1978) The effect of chronic alcohol ingestion and alcoholic liver
disease on binding of drugs to serum proteins. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 13, 435-438.

73

74

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Brown C, Taniguchi G, Yip K. (1989) The monoamine oxidase inhibitor-tyramine interaction.
J Clin Pharmacol29, 528-532.
Calvo R , Carlos R, Erill S. (1982) Effects of carbamylation of plasma proteins and
competitive displacers on drug handling in uraemia. Pharmacology 24, 248-252.
Caplin JL, Johnston A , Hamer J, Camm AJ. (1985) The acute changes in serum binding of
disopyramide and flecainide after myocardial infarction. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 28, 253255.
Carbonin P, Pahor M, Bernabei R , Sgadari A . (1991) Is age an independent risk factor of
adverse drug reactions in hospitalized medical patients? J A m Geriatr SOC39, 1093-1099.
Christensen LK, Hansen JM, Kristensen M. (1963) Sulphaphenoxazole-induced hypoglycaemic attacks in tolbutamide-treated diabetics. Lancet ii, 1298-1301.
Chin TF, Lach JL. (1975) Drug diffusion and availability: tetracycline metallic chelation.
A m J Hosp Pharm 32, 625-629.
Chrischilles EA, Segar ET, Wallace FU3. (1992) Self-reported adverse drug reactions and
related resource use. A study of community-dwelling persons of 65 years of age and older.
Ann Intern Med 117, 634-640.
Collier P, Maguire T, Morrow N, McCollum A , McElnay J, Scott M, Singleton M. (1993)
Care for the elderly. A study course for pharmacists. Northern Ireland Centre for Postgraduate Pharmaceutical Education and Training of Pharmacists, and the Pharmacy Practice
Group, School of Pharmacy, The Queen’s University of Belfast.
Collins JL, Lutz RJ. (1991) In vitro study of simultaneous infusion of incompatible drugs in
multilumen catheters. Heart Lung 20, 271-277.
Compston JE. (1994) The therapeutic use of bisphosphonates. Br Med J 309, 711-715.
Conney AH. (1967) Pharmacological implications of microsomal enzyme induction. Pharmacol Rev 19, 317-399.
Conney AH, Miller EC, Miller JA. (1956) The metabolism of methylated aminoazo dyes.
V. Evidence for the induction of enzyme synthesis in the rat by 3-methylcholanthrene.
Cancer Res 16, 450-459.
Conney AH, Miller EC, Miller JA. (1957) Substrate-induced synthesis and other properties
of benzpyrenehydroxylase in rat liver. J Biol Chem 228, 753-766.
Crooks MJ, Brown KF. (1974) The binding of sulphonylureas to serum albumin. J Pharm
Pharmacol26, 304-311.
Crounse RG. (1961) Human pharmacology of griseofulvin: the effect of fat intake on gastrointestinal absorption. J Invest Dermatol37, 529-533.
D’Arcy PF. (1979) Drug interactions. In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP (eds) Iatrogenic diseases,
2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford, DD. 45-76.
D’Arcy PF. (1983) Drug inieractions with medicinal plastics. Drug Intell Clin Pharm 17,
726-731.
D’Arcy PF. (1990) Adverse reactions to excipients in pharmaceutical formulations. In:
Florence AT, Salole E G (eds) Formulation factors in adverse reactions. Wright (Butterworth), London, pp. 1-22.
D’Arcy PF. (1991) Adverse reactions and interactions with herbal medicines, Part 1. Adverse
reactions. Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 10, 189-208.
D’Arcy PF. (1993) Adverse reactions and interactions with herbal medicines, Part 2. Drug
interactions. Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 12, 147-162.
D’Arcy PF. (1995) Nutrient-drug interactions. Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 14, 233254.
D’Arcy PF. (1996) Drug interactions and drug metabolizing enzymes. In: D’Arcy PF, McE1nay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug interactions. Springer, Berlin, pp. 151-171.
D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC. (1982) Drug interactions involving the displacement of drugs from
plasma protein and tissue binding sites. Pharmacol Ther 17, 211-220.
D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC. (1983) Adverse drug reactions and the elderly patient. Adverse
Drug React A c Pois Rev 2 , 67-101.

REFERENCES TO PART 1.

75

D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC, Welling PG (eds). (1996) Mechanisms of drug interactions. Springer,
Berlin.
David BM, Ilett KF, Whitford EG, Stenhouse NS. (1983) Prolonged variability in plasma
protein binding of disopyramide after acute myocardial infarction. Br J Clin Pharmacol
15, 435-441.
Dean WL, Gray RD. (1982) Relationship between state of aggregation and catalytic activity
for cytochrome P450 LM2 and NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase. J Biol Chem 257,
14679-14685.
Denham MJ. (1990) Adverse drug reactions. Br Med Bull 46, 53-62.
De Smet PAGM. (1992a) Toxicological outlook on the quality assurance of herbal remedies.
In: De Smet PAGM, Keller K, HBnsel R, Chandler RF (eds) Adverse effects of herbal
drugs, vol. 1. Springer, Berlin, pp. 1-72.
De Smet PAGM. (1992b) Drugs used in non-orthodox medicine. In: Dukes NMG (ed) Side
effects of drugs. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 1209-1232.
De Smet PAGM, D’Arcy PF. (1996) Drug interactions with herbal and other non-orthodox
remedies. In: D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug interactions.
Springer, Berlin, pp. 327-352.
De Smet PAGM, Keller K, HBnsel R , Chandler RF (eds). (1992) Adverse effects of herbal
drugs, vol. 1. Springer, Berlin.
De Smet PAGM, Keller K, HBnsel R , Chandler RF (eds). (1993) Adverse effects of herbal
drugs, vol. 2. Springer, Berlin.
Dossetor J. (1975) Drug interactions with oral contraceptives. Br Med J 4, 467-468.
Ducharme MP, Smythe M, Strohs G. (1993) Drug induced alterations in serum creatinine
concentrations. Ann Pharmacother 27, 622-633.
Durig T, Fassihi AR. (1993) Identification of stabilizing and destabilizing effects of excipientdrug interactions in solid dosage form design. Znt J Pharm 97, 162-170.
Feely J, Coakley D. (1990) Altered pharmacodynmics in the elderly. Clin Geriatr Med 6 ,
269-283.
Fels JP, Necciari J, Toussain P, Debry G , Luckx A , Scheen A . (1989) Effect of food
intake on kinetics and bioavailability of (4-chlorophenyl) thiomethylene bisphosponic acid
(abstract). Calcif Tissue Znt 44 (Suppl), S-104.
Ferrebee JW, Johnson BB, Mithoefer JC, Gardella JW. (1951) Insulin and adrenocorticotropin labelled with radio-iodine. Endocrinology 48, 277-283.
Fitchl B, Meister W, Schmied R. (1983) Serum protein binding of drugs is not altered in
patients with severe chronic cardiac failure. Znt J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxic01 21, 241244.
Fletcher AP, Griffin JP. (1986) Disorders of porphyrin metabolism. In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin
JP (eds) Iatrogenic diseases, 3rd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 67-81.
Fogelman I, Smith ML, Mazess R, Bevan JA. (1984) Absorption of diphosphonate in normal
subjects (abstract). Calcif Tissue Znt 36 (Suppl 2), 574.
Fogelman I , Smith ML, Mazess R , Bevan JA. (1985) Absorption of oral diphosphonate in
normal subjects (abstract). Bone 6 , 54.
Fogelman I , Smith ML, Mazess R , Wilson MA, Bevan JA. (1986) Absorption of oral
diphosphonate in nomal subjects. Clin Endocrinol24, 57-62.
Fournier C, Hecquet B, Bastian G, Khayat D. (1992) Modification of the physiochemical
and pharmacological properties of anticancer platinum compounds by commercial 5-fluorouracil formulations - a comparative study using cisplatin and carboplatin. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol29, 461-466.
Frey FJ, Frey BM. (1984) Altered plasma protein binding of prednisolone in patients with
the nephrotic syndrome. Am J Kidney Dis 3, 339-348.
Galteau MM, Siest G . (1984) Drug effects in clinical chemistry, Part 2. Guidelines for
evaluation of analytical interference. J Clin Chem Clin Biochem 22, 275-279.
Gatti G, Grema F, Attardo-Parrinello G , Frantion P, Aguzzi F, Perucca E . (1987) Serum

76

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

protein binding of phenytoin and valproic acid in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Ther
Drug Monit 9 , 389-391.
Gault MH, Longerish L, Dawe M, Vasder SC. (1985) Combined liquid chromatographyhadioimmunoassay with improved specifity for serum digoxin. Clin Chem 31, 1272-1277.
Geary TG, Akood MA, Jensen JB. (1983) Characteristics of chloroquine binding to glass
and plastic. A m J Trop Med Hygn 32, 19-23.
Giacomini KM, Massoud N, Wong FM, Giacomini JC. (1984) Increased binding of verapamail to plasma proteins in patients with liver disease. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol6, 924-928.
Ginsburg CM, McCracken G H Jr, Petruska M, Olsen K. (1983) Effect of feeding on bioavailability of griseofulvin in children. J Pediatr 102, 309-311.
Gomez M, Alvarez A , Cid E . (1993) Influence of cellulose derivatives on in vitro stability
and availability of diethylpropion in prescription orders. Rev Med Chile 121, 1013-1016.
Gonzalez FJ. (1993) Cytochrome P450 in humans. In: Schenkman JB, Grein B (eds) Cytochrome P450. Springer, Berlin, pp. 239-257.
Gosney M, Tallis R. (1984) Prescription of contraindicated and interacting drugs in elderly
patients admitted to hospital. Lancet ii, 564-567.
Greenblatt DJ, Sellers EM, Shader RI. (1982) Drug disposition in old age. N Engl J Med
306, 1081-1088.
Griffin J. (1995) Government measures and the UK prescribing habits. Scrip Magazine,
November 1995, pp. 12-14.
Griffin JP, D’Arcy PF. (1996) Synergistic drug interactions. In: D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC,
Williams PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug interactions. Springer, Berlin, pp. 235-248.
Griffin JP, D’Arcy PF, Speirs CJ. (1988) A manual of adverse drug interactions, 4th edn.
Wright (Butterworth), London.
Grossman SH, Davis D, Kitchel BB, Shand DG, Routledge PA. (1982) Diazepam and
lidocaine plasma protein binding in renal disease. Clin Pharmacol Ther 31, 350-357.
Gugler R, Mueller G. (1978) Plasma protein binding of valproic acid in healthy subjects and
in patients with renal disease. Br J Clin Pharmacol5, 441-446.
Gurwitz JH, Avorn J. (1991) The ambiguous relation between aging and adverse drug
reactions. Ann Intern Med 114, 956-966.
Hansen HC, Spillum, A . (1991) Loss of nitroglycerin during passage through two different
infusion sets. Acta Pharm Nord 3 , 131-136.
Hasegawa T, Hara K, Hata S. (1994) Binding of dorzolamide and its metabolite, N-deethylated derzolamide, to human erythrocytes in vitro. Drug Metab Disposit 22, 377-38.
Holdiness MR. (1989) Clinical pharmacokinetics of clofazimine: a review. Clin Pharmacokinet 16, 74-85.
Huffman DH. (1974) The effect of spironolactone and canrenone on digoxin radioimmunoassay. Res Commun Chem Path01 Pharmacol9, 787.
Jaff6 M. (1886) Uber den Niederschlag welchen Pikrinsaeure in normalen Harn erzeugt und
Fber eine neue Reaktion des Kreatinins. Z Physiol Chem 10, 391-400.
Jenke DR. (1993) Modelling of solute sorption by polyvinyl chloride plastic infusion bags. J
Pharm Sci 82, 1134-1139.
Joseph JC, Schuna AA. (1990) Management of hypertension in the diabetic patient. Clin
Pharm 9 , 864-873.
Kellaway GSM, McCrae E . (1973) Intensive monitoring for for adverse effects in patients
discharged from acute medical wards. N Z Med J 7 8 , 525-528.
Koch-Weser J, Sellers EM. (1976) Binding of drugs to serum albumin, Part 1. N Engl J Med
294, 311-316.
Kowaluk EA, Roberts MS, Blackburn HD, Polack AE. (1981) Interaction between drugs
and polyvinyl chloride infusion bags. A m J Hosp Pharm 38, 1308-1314.
Kowaluk EA, Roberts MS, Polack AE. (1982) Interactions between drugs and intravenous
delivery systems. A m J Hosp Pharrn 39, 460-467.
Kowaluk EA, Roberts MS, Polack AE. (1983) Drug loss in polyolefin infusion systems. Am
J Hosp Pharm 40, 118-119.

REFERENCES TO PART 1

77

Lamy PP. (1991) Physiological changes due to age. Pharmacodynamic changes of drug action
and implications for therapy. Drugs Ageing 1, 385-404.
Landahl S. (1987) Drug treatment in 70-82 year-old persons. A longitudinal study. Acta
Med Scand 221, 179-184.
Lawson DH, Jick H. (1976) Drug prescribing in hospital: an international comparison. Am
J Public Health 66, 644-646.
Laznicek M, Senius KEO. (1986) Protein binding of tolfenamic acid in the plasma from
patients with renal and hepatic disease. Eur J Clin Pharmacol30, 591-596.
Levy G. (1970) Biopharmaceutical considerations in dosage form and design. In: Sprouls JB
(ed) Prescription pharmacy, 2nd edn. Lippincott, Philadelphia, pp. 70, 75, 80.
Levy M, Kewitz H, Altivein W, Hellebrand J , Eliakin S. (1980) Hospital admissions due to
adverse drug reactions: a comparative study from Jerusalem and Berlin. Eur J Clin PharmaC O 17,
~
25-31.
Lewis RJ, Trager F. Chan KK, Breckenridge AK, Orme M, Roland M, Schary W. (1974)
Warfarin stereochemical aspects of its metabolism and the interaction with phenylbutazone.
J Clin Invest 53, 1607-1617.
Lipka E , Crison JR, Schug BS, Blume HH, Amidon GL. (1996) Drug interactions in the
gastrointestinal tract and their impact on drug absorption and systemic availability: A
mechanistic review. In: D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug
interactions. Springer, Berlin, pp. 13-43.
Lippman SB, Nash K. (1990) Monoamine oxidase inhibitor update: potential adverse food
and drug interaction. Drug Safety 5 , 195-204.
Lohman JJHM, Merkus FWHM. (1987) Plasma protein binding of digoxin and some other
drugs in renal disease. Pharm Weekbl (Sci Ed) 9 , 75-78.
Lund W (ed) (1994) British Pharmaceutical Codex, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, pp.
311-322.
Lyons RW. (1979) Orange contact lenses from rifampicin. N Engl J Med 301, 372-373.
McElnay JC. (1996) Drug interactions at plasma and tissue binding sites. In: D’Arcy PF,
McElnay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug interactions. Springer, Berlin, pp.
125-149.
McElnay JC, D’Arcy PF. (1980) Sites and mechanisms of drug interactions. I. In vitro,
intestinal and metabolic interactions. Znt J Pharm 5 , 167-185.
McElnay JC, D’Arcy PF. (1983) Protein binding displacement interactions and their clinical
importance. Drugs 25, 495-513.
McElnay JC, D’Arcy PF. (1996) Age and genetic factors in drug interactions. In: D’Arcy
PF, McElnay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug interactions. Springer, Berlin, pp.
279-304.
McElnay JC, Elliott DS, Cartwright-Shamoon J, D’Arcy PF. (1988) Stability of methotrexate
and vinblastine in burette administration sets. Znt J Pharm 47, 239-247.
McElnay JC, Hughes CM. (1996) In vitro drug interactions. In: D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC,
Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug interactions. Springer, Berlin, pp. 248-278.
McGowan FX, Reiter MJ, Pritchett EI, Shand DG. (1982) Verapamil plasma binding relationship to a,-acid glycopotein and drug efficacy. Clin Pharmacol Ther 33, 485-490.
Melander A , Danielson K, Swchersten R, Wahlin E . (1977) Enhancement of bioavailability
of propranolol and metoprolol by food. Clin Pharmacol Ther 22, 108-112.
Moller JV, Sheikh MI. (1983) Renal organic anion transport system: pharmacological, physiological and biochemical aspects. Pharmacol Rev 34, 315-356.
Morris RG, Frewin DS, Saccoia NC, Goldsworthy WL, Jeffries WS, McPhee AJ. (1990)
Interference from digoxin-like immunoreactive substance(s) in commercial digoxin kit
assay methods. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 39, 359-363.
Morris RG, Lognado PY, Lehmann DR, Fremin DB, Glistak M, Bunret RB. (1987) Spironolactone as a source of interference in commercial digoxin immunoassay. Ther Drug Monit
9, 208-211.

78

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Narayanan S, Appleton HD. (1980) Creatinine: a review. Clin Chem 26, 1119-1126.
Natowicz M, Shaw L. (1991) Digoxin assay anomalies due to digoxin specific Fab immunotherapy. Drug Intel1 Clin Pharm 25, 739-741,
Neuvonen PJ, Gothoniu G, Hackman R , A F Bjorksten K. (1970) Interference of iron with
the absorption of tetracyclines in man. Br Med J 4 , 532-534.
Neuvonen PJ, Karkkainen S. (1983) Effects of charcoal, sodium bicarbonate and ammonium
chloride on chlorpropamide kinetics. Clin Pharmacol Ther 33, 386-393.
Nolan L, O’Malley K. (1988a) Prescribing for the elderly. I. Sensitivity of the elderly to
adverse drug reactions. J A m Geriatric Soc 36, 142-149.
Nolan L, O’Malley K. (1988b) Prescribing for the elderly. 11. Prescribing patterns: differences
due to age. J A m Geriatric Soc 36, 245-254.
Nolan L, O’Malley K. (1989) The need for a more rational approach to drug prescribing for
elderly people in niursing homes. Age Ageing 18, 52-56.
O’Byrne PO, O’Commor P, Feely J. (1988) Plasma protein binding of lignocaine and warfarin
in non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. Br J Clin Pharmacol26, 648.
Ouslander JG. (1981) Drug therapy in the elderly. A n n Intern Med 95, 711-722.
Paxon JW, Briant RH. (1984) cq-Acid glycoprotein concentrations and propranolol binding
in elderly patients with acute illness. Br J Clin Pharmacol 18, 806-810.
Pearson SD, Trissel LA. (1993) Leaching of diethylhexyl phthalate from polyvinyl chloride
containers by selected drugs and formulation components. Am J Hosp Pharm 50, 14051409.
Perucca E , Ruprah M, Richens A. (1981) Altered drug binding to serum proteins in pregnant
women: therapeutic relevance. J Roy Soc Med 72, 422-426.
Peters L. (1960) Renal tubular excretion of organic bases. Pharmacol Rev 12, 1-35.
Piafsky KH, Borga 0, Odar-Cederlof L, Johansson C, Sjovqist F. (1978) Increased plasma
protein binding of propranolol and chlorpromazine mediated by disease induced elevation
of plasma q-acid glycoprotein. N Engl J Med 299, 1435-1439.
Pinkard RN, Hawkins D, Farr RS. (1973) The influence of acetylsalicylic acid on the binding
of acetrizote to human albumin. A n n N Y Acad Sci 226, 341-354.
Plumbridge TW, Aarons LJ, Brown JR. (1978) Problems associated with analysis and interpretation of small molecule/macromolecular binding data. J Pharm Pharmacol30, 69-74.
Posner J , Rolan PE. (1994) Clinical pharmacokinetics. In: Griffin JP, O’Grady J, Wells FO
(eds) The textbook of pharmaceutical medicine, 2nd edn. Greystone Books, The Queen’s
University of Belfast, pp. 333-351.
Powell-Jackson PR. (1977) Interaction between azapropazone and warfarin. Br Med J 1 ,
1193-1194.
Pritchard JF, O’Neill PF, Affrime MB, Lowenthal DT. (1983) Influence of uraemia, haemodialysis and nonesterified fatty acids on zomepirac plasma protein binding. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 34, 881-688.
Rennick BR. (1981) Renal tubule transport of organic cations. Am J Physiol240, F83-F89.
Reynolds JEF (ed) (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th edn. The Pharmaceutical Press, London, pp. 137-138, 151-152.
Ridgway E , Stewart K, Rai G , Kelsey MC, Bielawska C. (1991) The pharmacokinetics of
cefuroxime axetil in the sick elderly patient. J Antimicrob Chemother 27, 663-668.
Riley SA, Flegg PJ, Mandal BK. (1986) Contact lens staining due to sulphasalazine. Lancet
i, 972.
Ritschel WA. (1980) Disposition of drugs in geriatric patients. Pharm Znt 1, 266-230.
Roberts MS, Kowaluk EA, Polack AE. (1991) Prediction of solute sorption by polyvinyl
chloride infusion bags. J Pharm Sci 80, 449-455.
Roe AR. (1989) Diet and drug interactions. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
Rolan PE. (1994) Plasma protein binding displacement interactions - why are they still
regarded as clinically important? Br J Clin Pharmacol37, 125-128.
Rosenberg HA, Bates TR. (1976) The influence of food on nitrofurantoin bioavailability.
Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 20, 227-232.

REFERENCES TO PART 1

79

Royal College of Physicians (1984) Report on medication for the elderly. J Roy Coll Physicians London 18, 7-17.
Salomies HEM, Heinonen RM, Toppila MAI. (1994) Sorptive loss of diazepam, nitroglycerin
and warfarin sodium to polypropylene-lined infusion bags (Softbags). Znt J Pharm 110,
197-201,
Salway JC.(1990) Drug-test interactions handbook. Chapman and Hall Medical, London.
Scatchard G . (1949) The attractions of protein for small molecules and ions. Ann N Y Acad
Sci 51, 660-672.
Schenker S , Bay M. (1994) Drug deposition and hepatotoxicity in the elderly. J Clin Gastroenterol 18, 232-237.
Schenkman JB, Grein H (eds) (1993) Cytochrome P450. Springer, Berlin.
Schneider JK, Mion LC, Frengley JD. (1992) Adverse drug reactions in an elderly outpatient
population. Am J Hosp Pharm 49, 90-96.
Schorderet M, Ferrero JD. (1996) Drug-drug interactions at receptors and other active sites.
In: D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug interactions. Springer,
Berlin, pp. 215-233.
Shaw PG. (1982) Common pitfalls in geriatric drug prescribing. Drugs 23, 324-328.
Shephard AM, Hewick DS, Moreland TA, Stevenson IH. (1977) Age as a determinant of
sensitivity to warfarin. Br J Clin Pharmacol4, 315-320.
Silber B, Sheiner LB, Powers JL, Winter ME, Sadee W. (1979) Spironolactone associated
assay interference. Clin Chem 25, 48-50.
Simons LA, Tett S, Simons J, Lauchlan R, McCallum J, Friedlander Y, Powell I. (1992)
Multiple medication use in the elderly - use of prescription and nonprescription drugs in
an Australian community setting. Med J Aust 157, 242.
Sloan RW. (1992) Principles of drug therapy in geriatric patients. Am Fam Physician 45,
2709-2718.
Smith RI, Idle JR. (1981) Genetic polymorphism in drug oxidation. In: Davis M, Tredger
JM, Williams R (eds) Drug reactions and the liver. Pitman Medical, Bath, pp. 95-104.
Soldin SJ, Papanastasiou-Diamandi A, Heyes J, Lingwood C, Oiley P. (1984) Are immunoassays for digoxin reliable? Clin Biochem 17, 317-320.
Somani P, Simon V, Gupta RK, King P, Shapiro RS, Stockard H. (1984) Lorcainide kinetics
and protein binding in patients with end-stage renal disease. Znt J Clin Pharmacol Ther
Toxic01 223, 121-125.
Somogyi A. (1996) In: D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug
interactions. Springer, Berlin, pp. 173-212.
Stanton LA, Peterson GM, Rumble RH, Cooper GM, Polack AE. (1994) Drug-related
admissions to an Australian hospital. J Clin Pharmacol Ther 19, 341-347.
Stewart RB, Cooper JW. (1994) Polypharmacy in the aged. Practical solutions. Drugs Ageing
4, 449-461.
Sugar J. (1974) Adrenochrome pigmentation of hydrophilic lenses. Arch Ophthalmol91, 1112.
Taormina D , Abdallah HY, Venkataramanan R , Logue L, Burkart GJ, Ptachcinski RJ,
Todo S, Fung JJ, Starzi TE. (1992) Stability and sorption of FK 506 in 5% dextrose and
0.9% sodium chloride injection in glass, polyvinyl chloride and polyolefin containers. Am
J Hosp Pharm 49, 119-122.
Tillement JP. (1980) Plasma binding of drugs. Pharm Znt 1, 64-65.
Tillement JP, Lhoste F, Gidicelli JF. (1978) Disease and drug protein binding. Clin Pharmacokinet 3 , 144-154.
Timbrel1 JA. (1993) Biotransformation of xenobiotics. In: Ballantyne B, Mars T , Turner P
(eds) General and applied toxicology, vol. 1. Macmillan, Basingstoke, pp. 89-119.
Tiula E, Elfving S. (1987) Serum protein binding of phenytoin, diazepam and propranolol
in age-related decrease in renal function. Ann Clin Res 129, 163-169.
Tiula E , Neuvonen PJ. (1986) Effect of total drug concentration on the free fraction in
uraemic sera. Ther Drug Monit 8 , 27-31.

80

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Trovato A, Nuhlicek DN, Midtling JE. (1991) Drug-nutrient interactions. A m Fam Physician
44, 1651-1658.
Tyrer JH, Eadie MJ, Sutherland JM, Hooper WD. (1970) Outbreak of anticonvulsant
intoxication in an Australian city. Br Med J 2, 271-273.
Ullrich KJ. (1994) Specificity of transporters for “organic anions” and “organic cations” in
the kidney. Biochim Biophys Acta 1197, 45-62.
Van Peer A, Westenborghs R, Heykants J, Gasparini R, Gauwenberg G. (1989) The effect
of food and dose on the oral systemic bioavailability of itraconazole in healthy subjects.
Eur J Clin Pharmacol 36, 423-426.
Vogel F. (1959) Modern problems of human genetics. Ergeb INN Med Kinderheikd 12, 52125.
Wade A, Weller PJ. (1994) Handbook of pharmaceutical excipients. American Pharmaceutical Association, Washington and The Pharmaceutical Press, London.
Wallace DE, Watanabe AS11977) Drug effects in geriatric patients. Drug Intel1 Clin Pharm
11. 597-603.
Webb D, Buss DC, Fifield R, Bateman DN, Routledge PA. (1986) The plasma protein
binding of metoclopramide in health and renal disease. Br J Clin Pharmacol21, 334-336.
Welling PG. (1977) Influence of food and diet on gastrointestinal drug absorption. A review.
J Pharmacokin Biopharm 5 , 291-334.
Welling PG. (1996) Drug-food interactions affecting drug absorption. In: D’Arcy PF, McE1nay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug interactions. Springer, Berlin, pp. 45-123.
Wharton R, Lewith G. (1986) Complementary medicine and the general practitioner. Br
Med J 292, 1498-1500.
Williams L, Lowenthal DT. (1992) Drug therapy in the elderly. South Med J 85, 127-131.
Williamson J , Chopin JM. (1980) Adverse reactions to prescribed drugs in the elderly: a
multicentre investigation. Age Ageing 9, 73-80.
Yahya AM, McElnay JC, D’Arcy PF. (1985) Binding of chloroquin to glass. Int J Pharm
25, 217-223.
Yahya AM, McElnay JC, D’Arcy PF. (1986) Investigation of chloroquine binding to plastic
materials. Int J Pharm 34, 137-143.
Yosselson-Superstine S. (1996) Drugs causing interference with laboratory tests. In: D’Arcy
PF, McElnay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug interactions. Springer, Berlin, pp.
305-326.
Young DS. (1990) Effects of drugs on clinical laboratory tests. AACC, Washington.
Zarowitz B, Shlom J , Eichenhorn MS, Popovich J. (1985) Alterations in theophylline protein
binding in acutely ill patients and COPD. Chest 87, 766-769.

PART 2
Drug Interaction Tables

Notes on Interpretation of Drug Interaction Tables
The drug interactions cited in these tables refer in the main to clinically relevant
drug interactions known to occur in man, and of which there are usually several
reported cases in the world literature. Exceptions to this principle have been made
where a drug interaction is well known to occur with a closely related chemical
compound and where animal data or some clinical evidence indicate that a similar
reaction may occur with the mentioned compound. We have not hesitated to cite
the ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium as a reference source, where necessary, since
information known to the manufacturer, and frequently not yet published in the
medical or pharmaceutical literature, is often cited in individual product data sheets
for the first time.
In these tables, we have reported drug interactions under official or INN names;
we have avoided the use of proprietary names since these are voluminous, and are
frequently different from country to country. Such names are readily available in
MZMS, Index Nominum and similar publications. The order of the tables, broadly
follows the classification of the chapters and sections used in the British National
Formulary. The figures in parentheses refer to abbreviated references at the end of
the respective tables.
To avoid loss of information about interactions that arise whilst the book is being
printed we have arranged with Elsevier to print Chapter 16 of the Drug Interaction
Tables, “Recent and unconfirmed drug interactions”, as late as possible so that we
can record clinically important interactions that are published in the medical or
pharmaceutical literature whilst our book is being printed and assembled.

81

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 1
Drug Interactions with Agents Used to Treat
Gastrointestinal Disease

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

SECTION I. INTERACTIONS WITH
AGENTS USED TO TREAT PEPTIC
ULCERATION AND OTHER UPPER
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
1.1. PROTON PUMP INHIBITORS
OMEPRAZOLE
LANSOPRAZOLE
PANTOPRAZOLE
Therapeutic class and
Both omeprazole and lansoprazole inhibit gastric acid
Uses
production by blocking the hydrogen-potassium
adenosine triphosphate system (the ‘proton pump’).
They are used in the treatment of gastric and duodenal
ulcers and for erosive and reflux oesophagitis.
Peptic ulceration and probably stomach cancer are
causally related to Helicobacter pylori infection of the
gastric and duodenal mucosa. Omeprazole is the drug
of choice to be used with combined antibiotic therapy
in Helicobacter pylori eradication programmes.
Regimens recommended
Omeprazole + amoxycillin for 14 days
Omeprazole + amoxycillin metronidazole for 7 days
Omeprazole + clarithromycin

+

Side effects

Omeprazole is used to inhibit excessive acid
production in Zollinger Ellison syndrome: skin rash,
urticaria and pruritis have been reported, also
somnolence, insomnia, vertigo, mental confusion,
agitation, depression and hallucinations. Arthritic and
myalgic symptoms have been reported but resolve on
cessation of therapy (1).
Blurred vision and taste disturbance have also been
reported.
Blood dyscrasias associated with omeprazole are
leucopoenia and thrombocytopoenia.
In patients with pre-existing liver disease, hepatitis

85

86

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

with or without jaundice encephalopathy may develop.
Increases in liver enzymes in otherwise asymptomatic
patients have occasionally been recorded.
At the present time there is inadequate data to draw
up a meaningful spectrum of lansoprazole's side
effects.
Lansoprazole is a weak inducer of cytochrome P450,
however, the drug has been too recently introduced to
determine whether or not this could be clinically
significant.
Recorded interactions
(2-5)

Omeprazole can delay the elimination of diazepam,
phenytoin and warfarin. Monitoring patients receiving
warfarin or phenytoin is recommended and a reduction
in warfarin or phenytoin dose may be necessary when
omeprazole is added to an established treatment
regimen with either of these two drugs.
A 54% decrease in the clearance of diazepam and a
130% increase in the half life of diazepam has been
reported (3). In vitro studies using human liver
microzomes showed the conversion of diazepam to
nordiazepam was not affected by omeprazole, the
conversion of diazepam to 3-hydroxydiazepam was
inhibited. The principle metabolite of omeprazole,
omeprazole sulphone inhibited both metabolic
pathways of diazepam (4).
There is no evidence of interaction with theophylline,
propranolol, metoprolol, lidocaine, quinidine,
amoxycillin or antacids.
The absorption of omeprazole is not affected by food
or alcohol.
Simultaneous treatment with omeprazole and digoxin
leads to a 10% increase in the bioavailability of
digoxin due to increased gastric pH.
No pharmacokinetic interaction between diazepam and
pantoprazole was observed in 12 human volunteers (5).

Extent of clinical use

Over 100 million treatment courses of omeprazole
have been prescribed world wide and it is currently
one of the two most widely prescribed medicines. In
1994 prescriptions on FPlO and GPlO cost the British
NHS El87 million or 4.78% of all FHSA medicines
costs.
Lansoprazole has been too recently introduced to

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED TO TREAT GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE

87

estimate its impact on the NHS medicines bill. In 1994
it accounted for 26 million or 0.15% of prescription
costs on FPlO or GPlO to the British NHS medicines
bill.

1.2. HISTAMINE2 RECEPTOR BLOCKING AGENTS
CIMETIDINE
FAMOTIDINE
NIZATIDINE
RANITIDINE
Therapeutic class and
Cimetidine, famotidine, nizatide and ranitidine are
Uses
histaminez receptor antagonists (H2RA). They inhibit
basal and stimulated secretion of gastric acid reducing
both volume, acid and pepsin content.
H2RA are used for the treatment of gastric and
duodenal ulcers, oesophageal reflux and Zollinger
Ellison syndrome.
They are also used before general anaesthesia in
patients at risk of acid aspiration into the lungs
(Mendelson’s syndrome), particularly in obstetric
patients.
H2RA are also used in conjunction with NSAIDs to
counteract gastro intestinal ulcerogenic activity.
Helicobacter pylori eradication
Helicobacter pylori is now recognized as the causative
organism in most cases of peptic ulceration. It has also
been classified as a Class I carcinogen. H2RA are used
in combination with various antibiotic regimens to
eliminate Helicobacter pylori.
Side effects

Transient and reversible changes in liver function can
occur and there have been reports of hepatocellular,
hepatocanalicular and mixed hepatitis with and without
jaundice. Acute pancreatitis has been reported with
several members of this therapeutic class.
Leucopenia and thrombocytopenia have been reported
but are rare, as is agranulocytosis and pancytopenia.
Hypersensitivity reactions such as urticaria,
angioneurotic oedema, fever bronchospasm,
hypotension and anaphylaxis and toxic epidermal
necrosis have been reported.
H2RA can cause bradycardia, AV block and asystole.
Arthralgia and myalgia have been reported.

88

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cimetidine has, unlike the other HzRA drugs, been
shown to cause gynaecomastia and impotence. The
relative risks of gynaecomastia for misoprostol,
omeprazole, cimetidine and ranitidine were 2.0, 0.6,
7.2 and 1.6 (6).
All HzRA have been reported to be secreted in human
milk, they should therefore be used with caution in
lactating mothers.
Interactions due to
inhibition of cytochrome
P450

Cimetidine retards oxidative hepatic drug metabolism
by binding to microsomal cytochrome P450.
Cimetidine by this mechanism prolongs the effective
half life of oral anticoagulants, phenytoin,
theophylline, intravenous lignocaine, and these
interactions are of clinical significance.
Flecanide plasma concentrations are increased by 30%
and half life increased by 10% in patients who have
concomitantly received cimetide for more than 1 week
with increased risk of cardiac side effects.
Cimetidine also slows the metabolism of diazepam and
propranolol.
Famotidine, nizatide and ranitidine do not inhibit
hepatic cytochrome P450 and therefore do not
potentiate the actions of drugs which are inactivated by
this system, e.g. diazepam, phenytoin, lignocaine,
propranolol, theophylline and warfarin.
Ranitidine absorption is not affected by food or
antacids.
H2RA antagonists may increase the absorption of
salicylates.

Extent of clinical use

Cimetidine, famotidine, nizatide and ranitidine
accounted for 1.18, 0.14, 0.19 and 4.76%, respectively,
of the cost of all NHS prescriptions written on FPlO or
GPlO in the United Kingdom in 1994 or 6.27% or
2245 million of the total FHSA medicines bill.

Combination

Anticoagulant/H2
receptor antagonist
e.g. cimetidine (7-19)

Interaction

Studies in normal subjects and in patients have shown
that cimetidine interacts with stabilized warfarin
regimens to increase blood clotting ratio and
prothrombin by about 20% ; plasma warfarin
concentrations almost doubled. Mechanisms have

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED TO TREAT GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE

Combination

89

Interaction

been attributed to inhibition of warfarin metabolism
(7-13).
One controlled study investigating the effects of
cimetidine in a large population of patients receiving
stable warfarin regimens studied the effect of two
dosage regimens of cimetidine (300 mg qds or 800 mg
daily at bedtime for 15 days) in a cross-over study on
prothrombin time ratios (PTRs) of 27 patients
stabilized on conservative warfarin regimens giving a
PTR of 1.2-2.0.
The PRT increased with both cimetidine regimens,
although the mean PRT remained within current
recommendations for anticoagulation. The mean PRT
after stabilization on cimetidine ranged from 1.65 to
1.75 for the 800-mg dose at bedtime, and from 1.70 to
1.82 for the 300-mg x 4/day regimen. Only two
patients achieved prothrombin times (PTs) of 30 sec
(upper limit of desired anticoagulation) and the
maximum PT was 30.5 sec. Warfarin AUCs increased
significantly with either regimen (39% for x4/day and
21% for bedtime administration). The addition of the
two regimens of cimetidine dosage to a stabilized
warfarin regimen did not lead to any serious degree of
anticoagulation, despite decreased warfarin clearance.
Nonetheless, cimetidine did increase PTRs
and serum warfarin concentrations, so the prothrombin
time should be monitored when cimetidine is added to
anticoagulant therapy (14).
Cimetidine interacts with the R- but not the S-isomer
of warfarin (15-17).
ranitidine (18)

In contrast, ranitidine does not affect the anticoagulant
action of warfarin, since it is without an inhibitory
effect on hepatic P450 enzyme systems (95).

phenprocoumon/
cimetidine (19)

Cimetidine (400 mg bid) given to 10 patients taking
phenprocoumon (9-22.5 mg/week) did not affect
anticoagulant control or plasma phenprocoumon levels.
Phenprocoumon is excreted predominantly after
glucuronidation, thus cimetidine, which acts upon
mixed functional oxidase systems in the liver, does not
influence this metabolism. It was suggested that
cimetidine can be combined with phenprocoumon

90

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

phenprocoumon/
imetidine (19)
cont.

without increasing the risk of bleeding complications
(19) *

Antiepileptic agents/Hz
receptor antagonist
e.g. carbamazepine (20)
phenytoin (21)

Eleven epileptic patients taking regular carbamazepine
or carbamazepine and phenytoin were treated with
cimetidine 300 mg tds for 7 or 10 days (17). No change
in carbamazepine steady-state plasma levels was
observed. A mean rise in phenytoin levels of 27% was
found by 1 week.
Cimetidine (400 mg daily) caused increased plasma
carbamazepine concentrations and neurological toxicity
in an elderly woman who had been successfully treated
with carbamazepine (600 mg daily) for 20 years for
trigeminal neuralgia (21).

Cisapride/H receptor
antagonist
e.g. cimetidine (22)
ranitidine (96)

Enhanced cisapride bioavailability and accelerated
cimetidine absorption (22). Cisapride has also been
shown to increase the rate of ranitidine absorption
(96) *

Cyclosporin/Hz receptor
antagonists
e.g. cimetidine
(23-27)

Cimetidine prolongs the half-life of cyclosporin and
increases the serum levels.

Local anaesthetics/H,
receptor antagnosists
e. g . cimetidine,
ranitidine

Studies of the effect of H2-receptor antagonists on the
pharmacokinetics of bupivacaine have yielded variable
results. While one group of investigators found that
pretreatment with ranitidine has either increased
plasma concentrations of bupivacaine (31) or had no
significant effect (30). Cimetidine (300 mg qid for 1
day) given to six normal subjects reduced the systemic
clearance of lignocaine (lidocaine) (1 mg/kg by 10 min
i.v. infusion) from 766 to 47 ml/min; the apparent
volume of distribution at steady state and the degree
of plasma protein binding of lignocaine were also
decreased. Five of the six subjects noted lignocaine
toxicity during the cimetidine infusion when peak
lignocaine concentration was raised by a mean of 50%
(32). The mechanism of this interaction appears to be
multifactorial, involving both altered distribution and

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED TO TREAT GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE

Combination

91

Interaction

clearance; these are likely to be due to cimetidine’s
known inhibition of oxidative pathways of
biotransformation causing impaired metabolism of
lignocaine and an induced decrease in liver blood flow
via its vasoconstrictor effects on splanchnic circulation.
Side effects should be anticipated when i.v. lignocaine
is given to patients also receiving cimetidine. The total
dose of lignocaine should be infused slowly or given by
repeated small doses. Another report (34) cautions
against routine administration of cimetidine to patients
receiving lignocaine unless serum lignocaine levels are
monitored or the dose of lignocaine is adjusted to
counterbalance the enhanced and potentially toxic
effects.
Procainamide/H2
receptor antagonist
e .g . cimetidine
(35-38)

Cimetidine increases the procainamide plasma
concentrations by reducing the renal clearance of
procainamide

Suxamethonium/Hz
receptor antagonists
(39-41)

There are conflicting reports on the effect of
cimetidine on the neuromuscular blocking activity of
suxamethonium. Prolonged paralysis (39) and lack of
interaction have been reported (40).
Famotidine and ranitidine have been reported not to
interact with suxamethonium (41).

Theophylline/Hz
receptor
antagonists
e.g. ranitidine
famotidine
etinidine

Comparative sutdies have suggested that ranitidine
does not significantly inhibit theophylline metabolism
(46-51) even at very high dosage (50), although there
have been occasional reports of theophylline toxicity
after concomitant ranitidine therapy (51-53).

cimetidine

Famotidine does not alter theophylline disposition (54)
but etinidine reduced the clearance of theophylline and
prolonged its elimination half-life (55).
In contrast, cimetidine (1 g/day for 7 days) induced a
35% fall in systemic clearance of theophylline under
the same conditions (e.g. 30 min i.v. infusion of
theophylline (69).
An early report indicated that the elimination half-life
of theophylline was increased by a mean of 60% after

92

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

cimetidine
cont.

cimetidine administration (56). More detailed studies
have shown that cimetidine significantly decreased
theophylline clearance by a mean of 39% ; the
apparent volume of distribution was unchanged,
whereas the elimination rate constant was significantly
decreased by a mean of 42%. This corresponded to an
average increase in elimination half-life of 73% (57).
Other studies in young and elderly patients (47-50)
and in healthy subjects (63-64) have produced similar
findings. The mechanism of this interaction is thought
to be the inhibitory effect of cimetidine on hepatic
microsomal mixed-function oxidases such as
cytochrome P450 and P448 (57, 64, 65). Three cases
have been reported in which cimetidine apparently
reduced the rate of metabolism of aminophylline. The
first of these (66) cimetidine (300 mg qid) in an elderly
patient and evoked a grand ma1 seizure; her EEG was
consistent with a toxic or cerebral process. Large doses
of aminophylline had been used before cimetidine was
started without any complications. In the second case
(67) theophylline clearance was 4.75 litres/hr before
and 1.17 litres/hr during cimetidine (300 mg qid)
treatment, and theophylline half-life increased from 2.7
to 7.8 hr. Steady-state theophylline levels rose from
4.2 p,g/ml before cimetidine to 25.7 pg/ml during
cimetidine treatment. The third case (67) had endstage liver disease; her theophylline half-life was
tremendously long (118.8 hr) and termination of
cimetidine reduced this to 65.2 hr. During cimetidine
dosage her serum theophylline concentration was 41.2
p,g/ml. She died after liver failure. The rapid decrease
in theophylline half-life in this patient and the fact that
cimetidine is not extensively metabolized has suggested
that cimetidine reversibly binds to the enzyme systems
that metabolize theophylline without actually
interfering with the intrinsic activity.
It has been suggested that the cimetidine-theophylline
interaction does not occur in the liver, and that
theophylline forms a complex with cimetidine in the
blood, thus preventing theophylline from being
metabolized (68).

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED TO TREAT GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE

93

1.3. OTHER AGENTS
1.3.1. PROSTAGLANDIN ANALOGUES
MISOPROSTOL
Therapeutic class and
A synthetic prostaglandin analogue used in the
Uses
treatment of gastric and duodenal ulceration and in the
prevention of NSAID-associated ulceration. In a study
by Maide and Madhok (70) involving 9000 patients,
there was a 50% lower incidence of gastrointestinal
symptoms in the misoprostol-treated group compared
with an untreated group when given NSAIDs.
However, Shield and Morant (71) have pointed out
that 132 patients would have to be treated with
misoprostol to prevent one ADR associated with
taking NSAIDs.
Side effects

Hypotension
Increases uterine tone and should not be used in
pregnancy
Causes abnormal intramenstrual bleedings
Post-menopausal bleeding
Menorrhagia
Diarrhoea
Abdominal pain, dyspepsia, flatulence, nausea,
vomiting
Rashes
Dizziness

Reported interactions

In extensive studies no clinically significant drug
interaction has been attributed to misoprostol.

1.3.2. CHELATES AND COMPLEXES
TRIPOTASSIUM DICITRATO BISMUTHATE (De Nol)
Therapeutic class and
Uses

Gastric and duodenal ulcerations
Used in Helicobacter pylori eradication programmes in
combination with amoxycillin or amoxycillin and
metronidazole. It is thought to have a direct toxic
effect on Helicobacter pylori.

Side effects

Encephalopathy associated with older bismuth
subnitrate preparations has not been reported with De
Nol.

94

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

May darken the tongue and blacken faeces
Nausea, vomiting.
Combination

Interaction

Tetracyclines/De No1

Absorption of tetracyclines impaired due to chelation.

Omeprazole/De No1
(72)

Pretreatment with omeprazole resulted in an
approximately 300% increase in the absorption of
bismuth from tripotassium-dicitrato-bismuthate in six
healthy subjects. The mechanism was thought to be the
reduction in gastric pH produced by omeprazole.

1.3.3. SUCRALFATE
Therapeutic class and
Uses

Sucralfate is a combination of Al(OH)2 and sulphated
sucrose. It is used to treat gastric and duodenal
ulceration, also chronic gastritis.

Side effects

Constipation, diarrhoea, nausea, indigestion, dry
mouth, rash back pain, dizziness, insomnia, vertigo
and drowsiness

Interactions

Interactions with sucralfate are all due to impaired
absorption.

Combination

Interaction

Antibacterials/
sucralfate (74)

Reduced absorption of fluoroquinolone antibacterials
and tetracyclines.

Anticoagulants/
sucralfate (75)

Absorption of coumarins has been reported to be
reduced.

Antiepilepticd
sucralfate (71)

Reduced absorption of phenytoin.

AntifungaWsucralfate
(71)

Reduced absorption of ketoconazole.

Cardiac
glycosides/sucralfate
e.g. digoxin (73, 74)

Reduced absorption of digoxin. A case has been
reported of a 71-year-old woman who displayed altered
absorption of three other medications namely digoxin,

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED TO TREAT GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE

Combination

95

Interaction

quinidine sulphate, and warfarin sodium after being
given sucralfate. The administration of sucralfate
resulted in subtherapeutic serum concentrations of
digoxin and quinidine, and also reduced the patient's
prothrombin time (PT) , Discontinuation of sucralfate
increased PT and re-established therapeutic
concentrations of digoxin, quinidine, and warfarin.
Patients receiving sucralfate concomitantly with
digoxin, quinidine, and warfarin should be monitored
frequently with regard to serum drug concentration
and disease symptomatology.
Thyroxinehcralfate
(74)

Reduced absorption of oral thyroxine.

1.3.4. LIQUORICE DERIVATIVES
CARBENOXOLONE
DEGLYCORHIZINISED
LIQUORICE
(Caved S contains 380 mg deglycyrrhizinised liquorice
contains aluminium hydroxide and bismuth subnitrate)

Therapeutic class and
indications

Liquorice derivatives used in the treatment of gastric
and duodenal ulceration. The efficacy of these
preparations is low compared to HzRA and proton
pump inhibitors, and they are virtually obsolete as
therapy.

Side effects

Carbonoxolone sodium induces salt and water
retention, hypokalaemia leading to impaired
neuromuscular function and muscle and renal damage
with prolonged treatment.
Caved S a preparation containing deglycyrrhizinised
liquorice contains A12+ and bismuth.

Drug interactions

for Caved S see also interactions with A12' and Bismuth
salts

96

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anti-arrhythmics/
liquorice derivatives
(76, 77)

The urinary excretion of flecainide, mexiletine and
quinidine are reduced.

Antibacterials/liquorice
derivatives (76, 77)

The absorption of ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin,
pivampicillin, rifampicin, tetracyclines, tetraconazole
and ketoconazole are reduced.

Antihypertensives/
liquorice derivatives
(76, 77)

Carbenoxolone causes sodium and water retention and
therefore antagonizes the effects of anti hypertensive
therapy.

Cardiac
glycosides/liquorice
derivatives (76, 77)

Increased digoxin toxicity if carbenoxolone-induced
hypokalaemia occurs.

Corticosteroids/
liquorice derivatives
(76,771

Increased risk of hypokalaemia.

Diuretics/liquorice
derivatives (76, 77)

Antagonism of diuretic effect by propensity for
carbenoxalone to induce sodium and water retention.
Increased risk of hypokalaemia with acetazolamide,
thiazide and loop diuretics.
Amiloride and spironolactone inhibit carbenoxolone’s
ulcer healing actions.

Other agents/liquorice
derivatives (76, 77)

The absorption of a variety of unrelated compounds
may be reduced by carbenoxolone, e.g. chloroquine,
hydroxychloroquine, phenothiazines, oral iron,
dipyridamole , penicillamine.

Extent of Clinical Use

The ‘other drugs’ covered in this section used in the
treatment of gastric and duodenal ulcer currently only
have a very minor role in terms of market volume in
the United Kingdom.
Misoprostol (Cytotec) had the largest market share in
this group and FPlO and GPlO prescriptions in 1994
amounted to f 3 million or 0.07% of the FHSA
medicines bill.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED TO TREAT GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE

97

1.3.5. ALUMINIUM AND MAGNESIUM CONTAINING ANTACIDS
ALUMINIUM HYDROXIDE
MAGNESIUM CARBONATE
MAGNESIUM TRISILICATE
ALUMINIUM/MAGNESIUM COMPLEXES
Hydrotalcite
Magaldrate
Co-magaldrax

ALUMINIUM AND MAGNESIUM CONTAINING ANTACIDS WITH OTHER
INGREDIENTS
e.g. Dimethicone
e.g. Asilone sodium alginate
e .g . Gaviscon

BICARBONATES
Therapeutic class and
uses

Antacids are preparations designed to neutralize
gastric acid.

Side effects

Magnesium salts tend also to have a laxative action,
aluminium salts to cause constipation.

Reported drug
interactions

Interactions are largely due to A12+ or Mg2+ ions
chelating with the drug being absorbed, e.g.
tetracyclines, or affect absorption or excretion of drugs
which are pH dependent.

Cornbination

Interaction

ACE inhibitors/
antacids (78)

Co-administration of antacids with fosinopril or other
ACE inhibitors has been shown to reduce serum levels
and urinary excretion.

Aspiridantacids

Excretion of aspirin is increased in alkaline urine,
(forced alkaline diuresis is standard treatment of
aspirin overdose). Antacids increase excretion and
reduce analgesic effect of aspirin.

Anti-arrhythmic
agentdantacids (78)

Excretion of quinidine is reduced in alkaline urine thus
increasing risk of quinidine toxicity.

98

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antibacterialdantacids
(80-87)

A12+ and Mg2' ions chelate with tetracycline (80),
chlortetracycline (81) and form insoluble complexes.
The absorption of other antibacterials is inhibited due
purely to a pH effect, e.g.
azithromycin (84)
cefpodoxime (87)
ciprofloxacin (83)
ethambutol (82)
isoniazid (87)
nitrofurantoin (72)
norfloxacin (87)
oxafloxacin (87)
pivampicillin (85)
rifampicin (86)

Antifungaldantacids
(87)

Antacids reduce absorption of imidazole derivatives
itraconazole and ketoconazole.

Antiepileptics/antacids
(87)

Antacids reduce the absorption of gabapentin and
phenytoin.

Biphosphonates/
antacids (88-92)

Antacids reduce absorption of all the bisphosphate
group of drugs, e.g.
disodium etidronate
disodium pamidronate
sodium clodronate
tiludronate

Cardiac glycosides/
antacids e.g. digoxin
(93)

Magnesium trisilicate has been shown to reduce
digoxin absorption.

Chlorpromazine/
antacids (94)

Aluminium and magnesium containing antacids reduce
the absorption of chlorpromazine.

Irodantacids (87)

Magnesium trisilicate reduces the absorption of oral
iron,

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED TO TREAT GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE

Combination

99

Interaction

Lithium/antacids (87)

Sodium bicarbonate increases excretion of lithium and
therefore reduces plasma lithium concentrations.

Penicillamine/antacids
(87)

Antacids reduce penicillamine absorption.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

SECTION 11. DRUGS AFFECTING
GASTROINTESTINAL MOTILITY

1. CISAPRIDE
Cisapride is described as a gastrointestinal prokinetic agent which stimulates lower
oesophageal, gastric, small intestinal and colonic motility. it is used in the treatment
of dyspepsia, gastrointestinal reflux and impaired gastric motility. Cisapride has
been reported to be associated with prolongation of the QT interval and since it is
metabolized by the cytochrome P450 3A4 system, co-administration with any drug
that can impair cisapride’s hepatic metabolism or itself can cause QT interval is
contraindicated since the risk of torsade de pointes and ventricular fibrillation is
increased.
Cisapride should be used with caution in patients with conditions associated with
QT prolongation such as congenital QT syndrome, or patients with electrolyte
disturbances.

Cornbination

Interaction

Anticoagulants/
cisapride (97)

Cisapride increases the rate of gastric emptying and
intestinal motility is increased. Absorption of warfarin
is affected and prothrombin time is increased.
Prothrombin time should be checked a few days after
initiating or discontinuing cisapride treatment.

Anticonvulsants/
cisapride (97)

Cisapride can affect the absorption of anticonvulsants,
and if cisapride treatment is initiated it is advisable to
measure the plasma concentrations of antiepileptic
drugs several days after initiation or discontinuation of
cisapride therapy.

101

102

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antibacterial
agentdcisapride
clarithromycin (95)
erythromycin (95)

Macrolide antibiotics, e.g. erythromycin and
clarithromycin, inhibit the metabolism of cisapride.
This leads to prolongation of QT interval and torsade
de pointes or ventricular fibrillation.
The Committee on Safety of Medicines (1996) drew
attention to eight such cases associated with
erythromycin and three cases such associated with
clarithromycin.

Antifungal
agentdcisapride
fluconazole (95)
itraconazole (95, 97)
ketoconazole (95, 97)
miconazole (96, 97)

Antifungal agents of the imidazole type have been
shown to inhibit cisapride metabolism by the
cytochrome P450 3A4 system and result in
prolongation of the QT interval leading to torsade de
pointes or ventricular fibrillation.
In March 1996 the Committee on Safety of medicines
reported six such cases associated with fluconazole,
two cases each with ketoconazole and itraconazole and
one case with micronazole.

Drugs prolonging QT
interval/cisapride (95)

As a general rule cisapride should not be used with
other drugs that have a propensity to increase the Q T
interval. e.g.
Antiarrhythmics
quinidine , procainamide, disopyramide , amiodarone
sotalol
Antipsychotics
pimozide and thioridazine in particular
Antihistamines
terfenadine and astemizole
Antimalarials
halofantrine.

H2 Receptor
antagonists/cisapride,
e.g. cimetidine
(22, 96, 97)
e.g. ranitidine (96, 97)I

Cisapride bioavailability is increased due to accelerated
absorption when given to cimetidine-treated subjects.
Increased bioavailability of cisapride may enhance its
effects on prolongation of QT interval.
Peak plasma concentrations of ranitidine were
achieved more rapidly in 12 healthy subjects who took
cisapride concomitantly with ranitidine dosage than
when they took ranitidine alone.

DRUGS AFFECTING GASTROINTESTINAL MOTILITY

103

2. METOCLOPRAMIDE HYDROCHLORIDE
Metoclopramide hydrochloride stimulates motility in the upper gastrointestinal
tract, and is used in the management of nausea, vomiting, gastro-oesophogeal
reflux and stasis. It is a dopamine-receptor antagonist and as such can give rise to
extrapyramidal symptoms such as parkinsonism and tardive dyskinesia (these reactions are much more common in children and the drug should not be given to
children under 14 years of age). Prolactin secretion may be stimulated causing
galactorrhoea.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome has also been reported as a rare complication.
This manifests itself with muscular rigidity, fever, raised creatine phosphokinase
leucocytosis and loss of consciousness. Blood dyscrasias, aldosteronism, hypotension
and effects on mental state, e.g. depression, uncontrolled crying, and delirium have
all been reported as side effects of metoclopramide.
Combination

carbamazepine/
metoclopromide (98)

Interaction

Neurotoxicity has been observed in a patient receiving
carbamazepine and metoclopramide.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

SECTION 111. DRUGS USED TO TREAT
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE

1. CORTICOSTEROIDS (see Chapter 6.2)
2. AMINOSALICYLATES
Aminosalicylates are used in the induction and maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis and active Crohn’s disease.
Preparations available
mesalazine
olsalazine
sulphasalazine
The most widely used member of this group is sulphasalazine and side effects that
have been reported with sulphasalazine can be expected with other members of the
group.
Side effects of sulphasalazine
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, headache and rashes are common.
More occasionally haematological abnormalities are manifest including megalablastic anaemia, Heinz body anaemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, agranulocytosis
aplastic anaemia. Regular haematological examination is advised monthly on patients on long-term therapy. Stevens-Johnson syndrome, neurotoxicity, lupus erythematosis, fibrosing alveolitis have been reported. Some contact lenses may be
stained yellow/orange.
The Committee on Safety of Medicines have advised that patients receiving
treatment with any of the aminosalicylates should be told to report any unexplained
bleeding, bruising or purpura, sore throat, or fever that occurs to their doctor
immediately. A blood count should be performed and treatment discontinued.
Sulphasalazine is a prodrug, in the large bowel. it is metabolized to 5-aminosalicylate which is the locally therapeutically active moeity and sulphapyridine which is
absorbed. This breakdown of the prodrug is largely achieved by the bacterial flora
in the large bowel.
The rate of elimination of absorbed sulphapyridine is by acetylation to acetyl
sulphapyridine and by 0-glucuronide formation. There is a genetically determined

105

106

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

dimorphism into fast or slow acetylators which affects metabolism and elimination
of sulphapyridine.
Cornbination

Antibacterials/
sulphasalazine
e.g. ampicillin (100)

e.g. rifampicin,
ethambutol (99)

Interaction

Only a small fraction of orally administered
sulphasalazine is absorbed, the remainder reaches the
colon intact where it is metabolized by azo-reduction
to yield sulphapyridine and therapeutically active 5amino salicylate. Ampicillin reduces the sulphapyridine
plasma concentrations and by inference this would
reduce the 5-aminosalicylate at the site of action.
Ampicillin action on gut flora is thought to be the
mechanism.
In a study of 11 patients maintained on sulphasalazine
for the treatment of Crohn’s disease, mean plasma
concentrations of sulphapyridine and acetylsulphapyridine were reduced when they were receiving
rifampicin and ethambutol simultaneously. This was
believed to be due either to hepatic microsomal
induction by rifampicin or to a reduction in the
systemic bioavailability of sulphapyridine by the effects
of the atibiotics on the intestinal flora. The latter
explanation was favoured.

Cardiac glycosides/
sulphasalazine digoxin
(102)

The absorption of digoxin may be reduced.

Folate/sulphasalazine
(102)

The absorption of dietary folate may be reduced. This
is probably the mechanism of production of the
megaloblastic anaemia which may occur during
sulphasalazine therapy .

Recommended further reading
Rodriguez LAG, Jick H (1994) Risk of gyaecomastia associated with cimetidine omeprazole
and other antiulcer drugs. Br. Med. J . 308, 503-506.
Committee on Safety of Medicines (1996) Cisapride interactions with antifungals and antibiotics. Curr. Problems Pharmacovigilance 22, 1.
Committee on Safety of Medicines (1995) Cisapride/ketoconazole interaction. Curr. Problems Pharmacovigilance 21, 1.
Committee on Safety of Medicines (1996) Drug-induced prolongation of the QT interval.
Curr. Problems Pharmacovigilance 22, 1,
Griffin JP (1996) The role of Helicobacter pylori in stomach ulcers and gastric cancer - an
opportunity for a cost effective public health programme. Znt. Pharmacy J. 10, 94-97.

DRUGS USED TO TREAT INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE

107

Thomas SHL (1994) Drugs QT interval abnormalities and ventricular arrhythmias. Adverse
Drug React. Toxicol. Rev. 13, 77-102.

REFERENCES

1 Bentler M et al. (1994) Br Med J 309, 1620.
2 Anderson T. (1991) Clin Pharmacokinet 21, 195.
3 Gugler R, Jensen JC. (1985) Gastroenterology 89, 1235.
4 Zomordi K, Houston JB. (1996) Br J Clin Pharmacol42, 157.
5 Gugler R , Hartman M et al. (1996) Br J Clin Pharmacol42, 249.
6 Rodriguez LAG, Jick H. (1994) Br Med J 308, 503.
7 Flind AC. (1978) Lancet ii, 1054.
8 Flind AC. (1978) Bri Med J 2 , 1367.
9 Hertzel D et al. (1978) Lancet ii, 649; Serlin MJ et al. (1979) Lancet ii, 317.
10 Silver BA, Bell WSR. (1979) A n n Intern Med 90, 348.
11 Wallin BA et al. (1979) A n n Intern Med 90, 993.
12 Breckenridge AM. (1979) Br J Clin Pharmaco18, 392P.
13 Kerley B, Ali M. (1982) Can Med Assoc J 126, 116.
14 Sax MJ et al. (1987) Clin Pharmacol 6 , 492.
15 Choonara IA et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol21, 271.
16 Toon S et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol32, 508.
17 Niopas I et al. (1991) Br J Clin Pharmacol32, 508.
18 Serlin MJ et a1 1981) Br J Clin Pharmacol 12, 791.
19 Harenberg J et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 14, 292.
20 Levene M et al. (1985) Neurology 35, 562.
21 Telerman-Toppet N et al. (1981) A n n Intern Med 94, 554.
22 Kirch W et al. (1989) Ther Drug Monitor 11, 141.
23 Wood AJ et al. (1983) Transplant Proc 15, S2409.
24 Freeman DJ et al. (1984) A n n Roy Coll Physicians Canada 17, 301.
25 Jarowenko MV et al. (1986) Transplantation 42, 311.
26 Schwass D E et al. (1986) Clin Nephrol 25 (Suppl 1) S117.
27 D’Souza MJ et al. (1988) Drug Metabol Disposit 16, 57.
28 Noble DW et al. (1987) Br J Anaesth 59, 735.
29 Pihlajamaki KK Br J Clin Pharmacol26, 403.
30 Flynn RJ et al. (1989) Br J Anaesth 62, 87.
31 Wilson CM. (1986) Br J Anaesth 58, 1330P.
32 Feely J et al. (1982) A n n Intern Med 96, 592.
33 Knapp AB. (1982) J A M A 247, 3174.
34 Schneck DW et al. (1984) Clin Pharmacol Ther 36, 584.
35 British National Formulary No 31 (1996) Appendix 1.
36 Somogyi A, Heinzow B. (1982) N Engl J Med 307, 1080.
37 Reidenberg MM et al. (1980) Clin Pharm Ther 28, 732.
38 Gugler R , Somogyi A. (1977) N Engl J Med 301, 435.
39 Kambam JR et al. (1987) Anaesth Analg 66, 191.
40 Turner DR et al. (1989) Br J Anaesth 63, 348.
41 Hill GE et al. (1976) Anaesthesiology 44, 439.
42 Darzentas LJ et al. (1983) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 17, 555.
43 Myhre KI, Walstad RA. (1983) Br J Clin Pharmacol 15, 683.
44 Arnold LA et al. (1979) Am J Hosp Pharm 35, 1059.
45 Shargel L et al. (1981) J Pharm Sci 7 0 , 599.
46 Breen KJ et al. (1982) Clin Pharmacol Ther 31, 297.
47 Segger JS et al. (1987) Arch Intern Med 147, 179.

108

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

48 Adebayo GI. (1989) Biopharm Drug Dispos 10, 77.
49 Boehning W. (1990) Eur J Clin Pharmacol38, 43.
50 Kelly HW et al. (1986) Clin Pharmacol Ther 39, 577.
51 Fernandes E, Malewiez FM. (1984) Ann Antern Med 100, 459.
52 Gardner ME, Sikorski GW. (1985) Ann Intern Med 100, 459.
53 Hegman GW, Gilbert RP. (1991) DICP Ann Pharmacother 25, 21.
54 Chremos AN et al. (1986) Clin Pharmacol Ther 39, 187.
55 Huang SM et al. (1987) Biopharm Drug Dispos 8, 561,
56 Jackson JE et al. (1980) Pharmacologist 22, 231.
57 Jackson JE et al. (1981) Ann Rev Resp Dis 123, 615.
58 Weinberger MM et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 672.
59 Hendeles L et al. (1981) Drug Intel1 CIin Pharm 15, 808.
60 Bauman JH, Kimelblatt BJ. (1981) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 15, 808.
61 Jackson JE, Plachetka JR. (1981) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 15, 809.
62 Vestal RE et al. (1983) Br J Clin Pharmacol 15, 411.
63 Reitberg DP et al. (1981) Ann Intern Med 95, 582.
64 Lalonde RL et al. (1983) Chest 83, 221.
65 Puurunen J, Pelkonen 0. (1979) Eur J Pharmacol55, 335.
66 Lofgren RP, Gilberton RA. (1982) Ann Intern Med 96, 378.
67 Cluxton RJ, Jr et al. (1982) Ann Intern Med 96, 684.
68 Zoglio MA, Maulding HU. (1970) J Pharm Sci 59, 215.
69 Breen KJ et al. (1982) Clin Pharmacol Ther 31, 297.
70 Maiden N, Madhok R. (1995) Br Med J 311, 1518.
71 Shield MJ, Morant SV. (1996) Br Med J 312, 846.
72 Treiber G et 01. (1994) Clin Pharmacol Ther 55, 486.
73 Rey AM, Gums JG. (1991) DICP Annals Pharmacother 25, 745.
74 ABPI Datasheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1986-1987 (sucralfate).
75 Reynolds JEF. (1992) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, The Pharmaceutical Press,
30th Edn, p. 905.
76 ABPI Datasheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1986-1987 (carbenoxolone) .
77 ABPI Datasheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1248 (cared S).
78 ABPI Datasheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1790 (fosinopril).
79 Offerhaus L. (1981) Pharmacol Ther 15, 45.
80 Neuvonen PJ et al. (1970) Br Med J 4, 532.
81 Levy G .(1970) In Prescription Pharmacy 2nd Edn, ed JB Sprowls. Lippicott, Philidelphia, USA, pp 70, 75, 80.
82 Mattila MJ et al. (1978) Br J Clin Pharmacol5, 161.
83 ABPZ Datasheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
189-191 (ciproflexacin).
84 ABPI Datasheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1416-1417 (azithromycin).
85 ABPI Datasheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
843-844 (pivampicillin).
86 ABPZ Datasheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1986-1987 (rifampicin).
87 British National Formulary No 31, March 1996, Appendix 1.
88 Simon C, Schlienger JL. (1984) J Med Strasbourg 15, 191.
89 Lin JH et al. (1991) Pharmacologist 33, 209.
90 Lin JH et al. (1991) Pharm Res 8, Suppl 5 , 273.

DRUGS USED TO TREAT INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE

109

91 Neccian J et al. (1992) 5th World Conference on Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
July 1992, Yokahama, Japan (abstract) p. 305.
92 Fleisch H. (1987) Clin Orthop Relat Res 217, 72.
93 McElnay JC et al. (1978) Br Med J 1. 1554.
94 Fann WE et al. (1973) Clin Pharmacol Ther 14, 135.
95 Committee on Safety of Medicines (1996) Current Problems in Pharmacovigilance 22,
1.
96 Rowbotham DJ et al. (1991) Br J Anaesth 67, 302.
97 ABPZ Datasheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
718-719, 739-740 (cisapride).
98 Sandy KR. (1984) Br Med J 288, 830.
99 Houston JB. (1985) Br J Clin Pharmacol 19, 526
100 Day JM, Houston JB. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol 11, 423P
101 Klotz U (1985) Clin Pharmacokinet 10, 285
102 ABPZ Datasheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1310 (sulphsalazine).

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 2
Drug Interactions with Agents Used in the
Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

2.1. INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC
DRUGS
I. POSITIVE IONOTROPIC DRUGS
(a) Cardiac glycosides
Acetyl digoxin
Deslanoside
Digitoxin
Digoxin
Lanatoside C
@Methyl digoxin
Prepared Digitalis
The cardiac glycosides have very similar pharmacological action, but differ considerably in their speed and duration of action.
The principal actions of the cardiac glycosides are an increase in the force of
myocardial contraction and a reduction in the conductivity of the heart. They are
most useful in the treatment of supraventricular tachycardias, especially in controlling the ventricular response to atrial fibrillation. Heart failure may be improved in
patients in sinus rhythm, because of changes in the availability of intracellular
calcium.
Cardiac glycosides have little effect on the heart until they are present in the
tissues in a concentration near to that at which toxic effects may occur.
Headache, anorexia and nausea may occur with therapeutic doses of cardiac
glycosides; but vomiting bradycardia or extrasystoles are evidence of overdosing.
Blurring of vision may occur and there may be disturbance of colour vision, objects
appearing yellow or green. Potassium depletion due to concurrently used diuretics
may precipitate toxicity. Therefore diuretics used in combination with digoxin or
other cardiac glycoside should be potassium sparing or should be given with
potassium supplements,
Digitalis is slowly cumulative due to its content of digitoxin; prolonged treatment
with digitalis may produce gynaecomastia in men, and swelling and breast tenderness in women.
Digitoxin is the most potent of the digitalis glycosides and is also the most
cumulative; the toxic effects are similar to those of digitalis, but it is more likely to
give rise to extra systoles and ventricular fibrillation. The toxic effects of digoxin

113

114

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

are similar to those of digitalis but it is more rapidly excreted than other digitalis
glycosides and therefore less likely to give rise to cumulative effects.
Digoxin and digitoxin are the cardiac glycosides used most widely and they
have generally displaced the use of digitalis. Renal function is the most important
determinant of digoxin dosage since it is eliminated unchanged by the kidney.
Elimination of digitoxin depends on metabolism by the liver.
In patients in mild heart failure a loading dose of digoxin is not required and a
steady-state plasma concentration is achieved after about 7 days when digoxin is
given in doses of 125 or 250 pg twice per day. When rapid digitalization is required,
digoxin (0.75-1.0 mg) may be given intravenously as an infusion over about 2 hr,
and this should be followed by the maintenance doses above.
Digitoxin which has a longer half-life need only be given once per day.
Medigoxin (P-methyl digoxin) acts rapidly when given by mouth or intravenously
and is similar to digoxin. Lanatoside C is intermediate between digoxin and digitoxin. Digoxin is a urinary metabolite of Lanatoside C.
When digoxin toxicity is such that it cannot be controlled by cessation of digoxin
treatment and correction of electrolyte balance, then digoxin-specific antibodies can
be used to treat digoxin or digitoxin overdose. Digoxin-specific antibodies (DigibindGlaxo-Wellcome) are available as a powder for preparation of an intravenous
infusion containing 40 mg digoxin-specific antibody fragments (F(ab)) .

b. Phosphodiesterase inhibitors
Enoximone
Milrinone

Enoximone and milrinone are selective phosphodies erase inhibi 3rs which exert
most of their effect on the myocardium. They administered intravenously in the
short-term treatment of congestive heart failure.
Enoximone has positive ionotropic and vasodilator effects which have been sustained over 48 hr. Such short-term treatment has not been observed to be associated
with any drug interactions. Enoximone has been used with the diuretics amiloride,
triamterine, frusemide, spironolactone, digitalis glycosides, p-adrenergic blockers,
lignocaine, nifedipine, procainamide, quinidine, heparin and warfarin without observed interaction (1).
Milrinone is a selective inhibitor of peak I11 phosphodiesterase isoenzyme in
cardiac and vascular muscle. It enhances AV node conduction. Milrinone has been
used in fully digitalized patients and produced a further ionotropic effect. Theoretical interaction between milrinone and calcium channel blockers has not been observed clinically. No interactions have been described according to the products data
sheet (2).
Physical incompatibility (precipitation) exists if frusemide or bumetanide is mixed
with milrinone solution. Sodium bicarbonate intravenous infusion should not be
used for dilution of milrinone (2).

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

115

11. ANTI-ARRHYTHMIC AGENTS
Anti-arrhythmic agents can be classified according to their effects on the electrical
behaviour of myocardial cells e.g.:

Class I (a) (b) (c):
Class 11:
Class 111:
Class IV:

Membrane stabilising drugs, e.g.
Class I (a) quinidine, Class (b) lignocaine, Class (c)
flecanide
P-Adrenergic blockers
Amiodarone, bretylium and sotalol (also Class 11)
Calcium channel blockers

However, clinically anti-arrhythmic agents can be more meaningfully classified into
those that act on supraventricular arrhythmias, or supraventricular and ventricular
arrhythmias, and those that act only on ventricular arrhythmias.
1. Supraventricular arrhythmias - adenosine, verapamil
2. Supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias - amiodarone, P-adrenergic
blockers, disopyramide, flecainide, procainamide, quinidine
3. Ventricular arrhythmias - bretylium, lignocaine, mexiletine, phenytoin, propafenone, tocainide

1. Supraventricular arrhythmias

Paroxysmal Supraventricular Tachycardia
Adenosine acts by slowing conduction through the AV node. This action can interrupt re-entry circuits involving the AV node and restore normal sinus rhythm in
patients with paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias. Once the circuit has been
broken the tachycardia stops. Adenosine can be used in the treatment of WolffParkinson-White syndrome. By transiently slowing AV conduction adenosine can
induce bradycardia. This can be exploited in the interpretation of ECG recordings
and can aid the evaluation of broad or narrow complex tachycardias. Severe bradycardia has been reported and some patients have required temporary pacing. The
effects of adenosine are not reversed by atropine.
Adenosine has a short duration of action 8-10 sec, the duration of action is
extended by dipyridamole which is a potent inhibitor of adenosine uptake. Asystole
has been reported following their concomitant administration.
Verapamil is usually effective in the treatment of supraventricular tachycardias.
An initial intravenous dose followed by oral treatment is the usual regimen. Hypotension may occur at high doses.
Verapamil should not be used for tachyarrhythmias where the QRS complex is
broad. Verapamil should not be used in the treatment of Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome.
Verapamil should not be injected into patients recently treated with p-adrenergic

116

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

blockers, because of the risk of hypotension AV block or even asystole. It may also
be dangerous to give verapamil and P-adrenergic blockers together by mouth (3).
Atrial Fibrillation
The ventricular rate can usually be controlled with digoxin. A P-adrenergic blocker
may be added if necessary.
The patient should be anticoagulated prior to treatment of atrial fibrillation if the
patient has valvular disease or is elderly to minimize the risk of emboli.
Atrial Flutter
Digoxin can be used to control ventricular rate. Reversion to sinus rhythm is best
achieved by DC shock.
If flutter is of long standing the patient should be anticoagulated before attempting
to convert to sinus rhythm, to minimize the risk of emboli.
2. Supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias
Amiodarone is used in the treatment of tachycardia associated with Wolff-ParkinsonWhite syndrome. It may be used in the treatment of other arrhythmias, but treatment should only be initiated under hospital supervision. Amiodarone may be
used under carefully controlled conditions and close supervision for the control of
paroxysm01 supraventricular tachycardia, nodal and ventricular tachycardia, atrial
fibrillation and flutter and ventricular fibrillation.
Patients taking amiodarone develop corneal micro deposits these are usually
discernable only by slit-lamp examination and, rarely, give rise to symptoms such
as visual haloes. However, drivers can be dazzled by oncoming headlights at night
by the severe manifestation of haloes(4). These deposits regress with termination
of therapy.
In rare cases optic neuritis may develop. Amiodarone can cause photosensitivity
and use of sunblocking creams is recommended.
Amiodarone contains iodine which can be released from the molecule and can
cause thyroid dysfunction. Both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism have been
reported.
Diffuse pulmonary alveolitis and fibrosis have been reported usually presenting
as dyspnoea. Alveolitis is claimed to resolve spontaneously on withdrawal of treatment but corticosteroids do assist the resolution of this condition.
Peripheral neuropathy and myopathy may complicate amiodarone therapy.
Amiodarone prolongs the QT interval and should not be used in combination
with other drugs that prolong the QT interval (vide infra).

Disopyramide is able to prevent and control a wide variety of cardiac arrhythmias,
probably by slowing conduction in the His-Purkinje system; and by increasing the
refractory period in myocardial muscle of both the atrium and ventricles.

INTERACTIONSWITH CARDIAC DRUGS

117

Disopyramide should not be used in second- or third-degree heart block. Reduced
dosage is recommended in patients with impaired renal function. Disopyramide
increases QT interval and should not be used in combination with other drugs which
prolong QT interval (5).
Disopyramide has marked antimuscarinic actions and may precipitate dry mouth,
blurred vision, urinary retention and should not be given to patients with glaucoma
( 5 ) or in patients with prostatic hypertrophy. Disopyramide may precipitate hypoglycaemia .

Flecainide is a potent sodium channel blocker, and slows conduction of electrical
impulses through cardiac muscle and the conducting system, prolonging the PR
interval and widening the QRS complex. Flecainide can be used for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, sustained ventricular tachycardia and premature ventricular beats.
Side effects include dizziness, visual disturbances, arrhythmogenic effects, nausea,
photosensitivity, hepatic enzyme changes and jaundice, peripheral neuropathy, pulmonary fibrosis and pneumonitis (6).
Procainamide treatment of ventricular arrhythmias, post-infarction induced arrhythmias, atrial fibrillation and Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome should be initiated in
hospital.
Procainamide is metabolized to N-acetyl procainamide which increases QT
interval and should not be used in combination with other drugs increasing the QT
interval (vide infra). Procainamide should not be used in patients with second- or
third-degree AV block unless a pacemarker is in situ. Procainamide should not be
used in patients with myasthenia gravis or SLE or bronchial asthma. Procainamide
can induce a lupus erythematosis-like syndrome in its own right, as well as serious
blood dyscrasias, and angioneurotic oedema (7).
Quinidine is used in the supression of supraventricular and ventricular tachyarrhythmias and in the maintenance of sinus rhythm following cardioversion of
atrial fibrillation. Quinidine should be used with caution in patients with impaired
AV conduction. Quinidine prolongs the QT interval and should not be used in
combination with other drugs that prolong QT interval (8).
3. Ventricular arrhythmias
Bretylium tosylate is used primarily for the treatment of ventricular fibrillation, and
has often proved effective where DC cardioversion has failed. This effect is attributed to its local anaesthetic properties.
It is administered intravenously or intramuscularly but can cause severe hypotension. This effect is due to its ability to interfere with postganglionic sympathetic
nervous transmission. Bretylium increases the QT interval and should not be used
in combination with other drugs with this potential (vide infra) (9, 10).

118

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Lignocaine hydrochloride is used in the prevention of ventricular tachyarrhythmias
in patients following acute myocardial infarction. AV block is an absolute contraindication (13).
Mexiletine hydrochloride is an anti-arrhythmic agent which depresses the maximum
rate of depolarization with little or no modification of resting potential or duration
of action potential. Mexiletine is used in the treatment of ventricular arrhythmias
but should not be used in the first 3 months following myocardial infarction.
Mexiletine can exacerbate certain arrhythmias and cause torsade de pointes.
Adverse effects include rash, jaundice, arthralgia, fever, thrombocytopenia,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and pulmonary fibrosis.
Phenytoin the use of phenytoin for its membrane stabilizing effects by slow intravenous injection for the treatment, particularly of digitalis-induced ventricular arrhythmias, is now obsolete.
Propafenone hydrochloride is a class I anti-arrhythmic agent with basic local anaesthetic and membrane-stabilizing properties. Some P-adrenergic blocking action has
also been described. Propafenone decreases the depolarization velocity and slows
conduction in the His-Purkinje system with resultant increase in the PR interval
and the QRS complex. Propafenone is used in the treatment of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias and ventricular arrhythmias.
Propafenone should not be used in uncontrolled cardiac failure, severe obstructive
pulmonary disease or marked hypotension. Propafenone may worsen myasthenia
gravis (11).
Tocainide is used for its membrane-stabilizing properties for the treatment of ventricular tachyarrhythmias. It is contraindicated in patients with second- or thirddegree heart block. Rare but reported adverse reactions include bone marrow
depression, pulmonary fibrosis, interstitial pneumonitis, Stevens-Johnson syndrome,
exfoliative dermatitis and lupus erythematosus-like syndrome (12).
4. Prolongation of QT interval
The QT interval is the duration between the beginning of the QRS complex and
the end of the T-wave on the electrocardiogram. Jervell et al. (14) described an
association between prolonged QT intervals and sudden death. Recent interest has
centred on drug-induced prolongation of the QT interval and a functional link to
serious ventricular arrhythmias (15) and cardiovascular mortality (16, 17). The
prototype arrhythmia is torsade de pointes (18). The mechanism underlying the
prolongation of the QT interval has been suggested to be an abnormal channel
protein reducing on outward repolarizing potassium current or increasing on inward
depolarizing calcium or sodium current (20). Prolonged QT intervals, in the presence of a slow heart rate, gives rise to early after depolarizations which can

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

119

initiate torsade de pointes (triggered arrhythmogenesis). At any given degree of
prolongation of QT interval the risk appears to depend more on QT interval
dispension (heterogeneous myocardial changes in repolarization) rather than QT
interval per se (homogeneous global myocardial changes).
Thomas et al. (1996) reviewed the drugs known to produce prolongation of the
QT interval. (see Table). It is known that the co-administration of any two drugs
both of which are known to increase the QT interval greatly increases the risk of
torsade de pointes and sudden death.

Table. DRUGS KNOWN TO PROLONG QT INTERVAL*
Therapeutic class

Individual drug

Antiarrhythmic agents Class Ia

disopyramide ( 5 ) , flecainide, quinidine (22), procainamide (7),

Antiarrhythmic agents Class I11

N-acetyl procainamide, amiodarone (4), nifenalol, sotalol (38):
bretylium (9)

Vasodilators
Psychotropics

prenylamine (25), cepridil (32)

Corticosteroids

prednisolone

Diuretics

frusemide

Lipid lowering agents

probucol (21)

Sympathomimetic amines

salbutamol (26), terbutaline (26), fenoterol (26)

Phenothiazines (39), tri- and tetracyclic antidepressants, pimozide
(35, 36), haloperidol (37)

Serotonin antagonists

ketanserin (27)

Gastric motility agents

cisapride (28, 33)

Antihistamines

terfenadine (29, 34), astemizole (30)

Anti-microbials

erythromycin and other macrolide antibiotics, chloroquine,
halofantrine (24, 31), mefloquine (23), quinine (23)

Drugs used in the treatment
of urinary incontinence

terodiline

*Modified after Thomas et al. (20).

I. INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC GLYCOSIDES
Combination

ACE inhibitorddigoxin
(39)

Interaction

Captopril increases the plasma concentration of
digoxin

120

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anaesthetics
(cyclopropane)/
cardiac glycosides (44)

Cyclopropane anaesthesia may induce signs of digitalis
intoxication in patients who are fully digitalized before
anaesthesia.

Anion exchange
resindcardiac glycosides
(41-43)

Absorption of all cardiac glycosides is reduced by the
anion-exchange resins cholestyramine or colestipol.
These ion-exchange resins (lipid-regulating agents)
interfere with the absorption of digoxin (41, 42).
Cholestyramine reduced digitoxin half-life in normal
subjects from 141.6 to 84.4 hr. Cholestyramine has
been used in the treatment of digitoxin poisoning
because it binds with digitoxin excreted in bile and
prevents enterohepatic recirculation (43).
Alternative cholesterol-lowering agents should be used
if they are required in patients being treated with
digoxin or digitoxin.

Antaciddcardiac
glycosides
e.g. activated
dimethicone
aluminium hydroxide
bismuth carbonate
calcium carbonate
magnesium oxide
magnesium peroxide
magnesium trisilicate
and
formulations containing
mixtures of these agents
(45-49)

The absorption kinetics of digoxin have been shown to
be affected in in vitro (45) and in vivo studies (46, 47).
Studies using an in vitro model of drug interactions in
the rat gut (48) have shown that the absorption of
digoxin is reduced by 99.5% in the presence of
magnesium trisilicate, 15.3% with light magnesium
carbonate, 15.2% with bismuth carbonate, 11.4% with
aluminium hydroxide gel, and 3.4% in the presence of
a 35% aqueous emulsion of activated dimethicone
(49).

Plasma levels of digoxin are effective only within a
narrow therapeutic range, and any factor which will
affect its bioavailability will give rise to problems in
patients stabilized on this drug. Patients should be
warned of this danger.
Anti-arrhythmia/
digoxin (39)

Digoxin plasma levels are increased by amiodarone,
flecainide, propafenone, quinidine.

amiodarone/digoxin (50,
51)

Seven patients on steady maintenance digoxin
treatment had their plasma digoxin concentrations

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

121

Interaction

raised by a mean of 69% after taking amiodarone
(600 mg daily); four of these patients developed
symptoms of digoxin toxicity. Amiodarone may
displace tissue-bound digoxin or interfere with digoxin
excretion,
Sharper increases in digoxin levels (66-800%) have
been observed in children. This exaggerated effect was
attributed to impaired renal clearance of digoxin due
to inhibition of its tubular secretion (this route of
clearance being specially important in children) (51).
Quinidine/digoxin

Quinidine causes an increase in serum digoxin
concentration in 90% of cases; increase is variable but
averages two-fold and the raised levels are maintained
(52). It has been suggested that the underlying
mechanisms include a quinidine-induced reduction of
both renal and non-renal clearance of digoxin. A
quinidine induced redistribution of digoxin by
displacement from tissue binding sites (57, 5 8 ) , leading
to a reduction in distribution volume (54, 59) followed
by decreased renal clearance of digoxin (52-54, 58, 60)
which is saturable (68), and this is the determinant of
the serum level during the steady state (59). This is
suggestive of a reduced binding of digoxin in muscle
(61-64). Serum protein binding sites are unlikely to be
involved (65). More recent work (66) has shown that
raised serum digoxin levels resulting from a digoxinquinidine interaction in patients with normal renal
function is due to a reduction in renal digoxin
clearance. Studies have now investigated the extent of
the interaction in patients with renal impairment to
determine whether an extrarenal mechanism is also
involved. Anuric patients also showed a marked but
variable increase in serum digoxin levels after
quinidine (mean pretreatment, 0.84 ng/ml; postquinidine, 1.58 ng/ml). Two other experiments showed
that quinidine did not affect serum protein binding of
digoxin in vitro or in vivo, so reduced renal digoxin
clearance is not due to increased serum protein
binding. While extrarenal digoxin excretion is of minor
importance in normal situations, in anuric patients it
becomes the main mechanism of elimination and,

122

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Quinidine/digoxin
cont.

because serum digoxin levels increase in such a
variable way after quinidine, digoxin dosage should be
carefully controlled during combination therapy in such
patients.
It has been suggested that the digoxin dose be halved
(54) before starting quinidine but, due to the variable
nature of the interaction, adjustment of digoxin dose
should be made 4-5 days after starting quindine if
serum digoxin concentration indicates reduction in
dosage is required. Patients should be monitored for
signs of too much or too little digoxin (69). The
interaction has been shown to have clinical significance
(67).
N B . Serum concentration and effect of digoxin will fall
when quinidine is withdrawn from a patient previously
stabilized on both drugs (57, 68).

Quinidine/digitoxin
(69-74)

Although it is well established that a digoxin-quinidine
interaction increases plasma digoxin levels (69-70), a
corresponding interaction between digitoxin and
quinidine is still somewhat controversial. A random
cross-over study in 10 normal subjects showed that the
two drugs could be taken together without evoking
change in digitoxin kinetics (36). These negative
findings have been questioned and other studies have
shown that digitoxin serum levels increased after
starting quinidine (71-74).

Antibacterialddigoxin
Erythromycin and other
macrolides/digoxin (7577, 150)

Erythromycin enhances the effects of digoxin by
increasing the plasma level. In approximately 10% of
patients given digoxin, substantial conversion of the
drug to cardioactive reduced metabolites (digoxin
reduction products, DRP) occurs. A 5-day course of
erythromycin or tetracycline to three such ‘excretors’
of DRPs markedly reduced or eliminated DRP
excretion in urine and stools and serum digoxin
concentrations rose as much as two-fold (75-76).
Changes in gut flora may enhance digoxin absorption;
one case is reported (77) in which an elderly patient
showed increased serum digoxin concentration (rise
from 1.4 to 2.6 ng/ml) and exhibited signs of toxicity

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

123

Interaction

(nausea and vomiting) after taking only four doses of
erythromycin (250 mg each, oral). An ECG showed an
AV junctional rhythm. She was also routinely receiving
warfarin and showed a prothrombin time of 47 sec
(compared with 25-32 sec previously). Digoxin was
stopped and the nausea abated with a return to sinus
rhythm. Previous doses of digoxin and warfarin were
resumed 1 month later without toxic symptoms. It has
previously been shown that gut flora may inactivate
digoxin prior to absorption and that antibiotics (e.g.
tetracyclines or erythromycin) may counteract this
through their action on gut flora. This case history
suggests that a small dose of orally administered
erythromycin (lg) can alter gut flora substantially,
resulting in a concomitantly increased prothrombin
time (due to reduced vitamin K production) and an
increase in serum digoxin concentrations up to toxic
levels (due to reduced digoxin inactivation.) This
confirms earlier clinical findings (75) that inactivation
of digoxin by gut flora may be reversed by antibiotics
resulting in elevation of serum digoxin levels.
Clarithromycin also increases digoxin levels and this
might result in digoxin toxicity. (150)
Neomycin/digoxin (39)

Plasma levels of digoxin are reduced by neomycin.

Rifampicin/digitoxin
(79, 80)
/digoxin (78)

Rifampicin accelerates the hepatic metabolism of
digitoxin (39). Rifampicin reduces the plasma levels of
digoxin.
A possible interaction between digoxin and rifampicin
occurred in a long-term dialysis patient who received
i.v. digoxin at the end of each dialysis session. Her
serum digoxin levels remained within the accepted
therapeutic range. One week after starting
antitubercular treatment with rifampicin, her serum
digoxin levels fell and she showed signs of heart
failure. Substitution of ethambutol for rifampicin
without digoxin change permitted serum digoxin levels
to rise. It is likely that rifampicin induced the
metabolism of a clinically significant fraction of the
digoxin administered. This interaction has not been

124

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Rifampicin/digitoxin
cont.

reported previously although an interaction between
digitoxin and rifampicin had been noted (79, 80).

Tetracycline/digoxin
(39)

Tetracycline increases the plasma levels of digoxin.

Trimethoprim/digoxin
(81)

Taking trimethoprim (200 mg twice daily for 2 weeks)
increased the plasma digoxin level by a mean of 22%
in nine patients (mean age 78, all having normal
creatinine values) maintained on constant doses of
0.125-0.25 mg digoxin orally; levels exceeded normal
(rising from 1.3 to 2.8 nmol/l) in one subject. In
contrast, dosing for 10 days with trimethoprim 200 mg
twice daily did not affect the total clearance of a
single-dose digoxin (1 mg i.v.) in six healthy subjects
(mean age 29). In these renal clearance was decreased
by 17%, glomerular filtration rate remaining constant.
It appears that trimethoprim decreases digoxin
clearance in the elderly but not in younger patients,
probably by reduced renal tubular secretion. In
addition, an alteration in gut flora by trimethoprim
may account for an effect on oral digoxin availability
not seen after intravenous dosing.

Anticonvulsantd
digoxin and digitoxin
(39, 82)

Enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants carbamazepine,
phenobarbitone and phenytoin accelerate the hepatic
metabolism of digitoxin but do not interact with
digoxin.

Antifungals/digoxin
Amphoterin B/digoxin
(83, 84)

Hypokalaemia may occur during amphotericin therapy
and facilitate the development of digitalis toxicity.
Treat the potassium deficiency as required.

Itraconazole/digoxin
(32)

Plasma level of digoxin is increased by itraconazole

Antimalarial
agentddigoxin (82)

Quinine, chloroquine, hydroxy-chloroquine and
mefloquine raise the plasma levels of digoxin with
increased risk of digitalis toxicity.

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

125

Interaction

Chloroquine and mefloquine also increase the QT
interval.

P-Adrenergic
blockers/cardiac
glycocides (82)

When used together there is increased risk of AV
block and bradycardia. P- Adrenergic blockers and
digoxin are used to reduce the ventricular rate in atrial
fibrillation and flutter which are not controlled by
digoxin alone but the procedure carries a significant
risk of inducing AV block.

Calcium channel
blockers/digoxin (82)

Plasma concentration of digoxin are increased by
diltiazem, nicardipine, nifedipine and verapamil.

Diltiazem/digoxin

A study on the effect of diltiazem on steady-state
digoxin levels was performed in 10 healthy subjects. A
constant dose of digoxin was given for 45 days.
Diltiazem (60 mg 8-hourly) was given on days 18-34.
The mean digoxin level rose by 20% after diltiazem
was added but did not alter after diltiazem was
withdrawn. Patients receiving these two drugs
concomitantly should be monitored carefully for 2
weeks after the addition or withdrawal of diltiazem.
Similar (but greater) changes have been previously
reported with nifedepine and verapamil.

Nifedipine/digoxin (88)

During co-administration of nifedipine (10 mg) and
digoxin (0.125 mg tid) to normal subjects, plasma
digoxin concentrations rose by a mean of 45%
compared with previous levels on digoxin alone. The
mechanism of this interaction has not been established.

Verapamil/digoxin (8688)

In normal subjects verapamil significantly decreased
the mean volume of distribution of digoxin from 0.83
to 0.64 l/kg, and digoxin total body clearance from
3.28 to 2.15 ml/min/kg; both renal and extrarenal
clearance were impaired. Verapamil may inhibit renal
clearance of digoxin by inhibiting tubular secretion.
Mean elimination half-life of digoxin increased by 31%
(86). Significant increases in digoxin serum
concentrations (0.76 to 1.31 ng/ml) have also been
reported following the addition of verapamil (240 mg
daily) to 49 patients who were previously stabilized on

126

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Verapamil/digoxin
cont.

digoxin; symptoms of toxicity occurred in several
patients (87).
Frequent plasma digoxin measurements and adequate
digoxin dosage reduction are recommended to avoid
unnecessary risks during the combined use of digoxin
and verapamil (86-88).

Calcium saltskardiac
glycocides (82, 89)

Large intravenous doses of calcium salts can
precipitate arrhythmias in digitalized patients.
A high concentration of calcium is inhibitory to
positive inotropic action of digitalis and potentiates
toxic effects. Ca2+ causes a dangerous increase in
ATP-ase inhibition.
Injections of calcium salts should not be given during
digitalis therapy, and digitalis (and other cardiac
glycosides) should be given cautiously to patients
receiving parathyroid extract or large doses of vitamin
D (89).

Diuretics/cardiac
glycocides (82, 92)

There is an increased risk of toxicity from cardiac
glycosides during diuretic treatment with agents that
induce hypokalaemia. This may occur with
acetazolamide, bumetamide, chlorthalidone, the loop
diuretics including ethacrynic acid, frusemide,
mefruside, thiazides.

Spironolactone/
digitoxin (43)

Spironolactone increased digitoxin half-life in normal
subjects from 141.6 to 192.2 hr.
This interaction may be harmful to digitoxin-treated
patients if they are given spironolactone as a diuretic
with K+-sparing effect.

Glucose infusion/cardiac
glycosides (93, 94)

A large intake of carbohydrate may worsen or
precipitate digitalis toxicity by causing a shift of
potassium into the cells with a decrease in serum
potassium.

Skeletal muscle
relaxants
(suxamethanium)/
cardiac glycosides (90,
91)

Suxamethonium appears to potentiate digitalis
glycosides with respect to their effect on conduction
and ventricular irritability. Arrhythmias have been
reported.
Anaesthetists should be aware of the possibility of this

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

127

Interaction

interaction; neuromuscular blocking drugs other than
suxamethonium should be used in digitalized patients.
Sympathomimetic
aminedcardiac
glycosides (95, 96)

Combination of these drugs results in increased
liability to ectopic pacemaker activity. Ephedrine
enhances the possibility of arrhythmias in particular.
Patients on digitalis glycosides should only be given
sympathomimetic drugs with caution.
Self medication with OTC medicines containing
sympathomimetic amines should be avoided.
Pharmacists should enquire whether or not a patient is
taking a cardiac glycoside before selling such an OTC
product.

Ulcer healing
drugdcardiac glycosides
(82, 145)

Carbonoxolone can cause hypokalaemia with increased
risk of arrhythmias in digitalized patients. Sucralfate
reduces absorption of digoxin and other cardiac
glycosides (145)

Miscellaneous
gastrointestinally acting
drugs/cardiac glycosides
(39)

A number of drugs that are used in the treatment of
bowel disease, which affect motility by a variety of
mechanisms, impair cardiac glycoside absorption, e.g.
kaolin-pectin, bulk-laxatives, metoclopramide,
diphenoxylate, sulphasalazine. Conversely there is
increased absorption of cardiac glycosides with
propantheline.

11. INTERACTIONS WITH ANTI-ARRHYTHMIC AGENTS
Interactions with P-adrenergic blockers and calcium antagonists are dealt with in
the chapter on antihypertensive drugs.

111. INTERACTIONS WITH ADENOSINE
Combination

Antiplatelet
drugs/adenosine (82)

Interaction

Dipyridamol increases the plasma level of adenosine
Asystole has been reported following concomitant
administration.

I

128

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Theophylline/
adenosine (82)

Interaction

The anti-arrhythmic effect of adenosine is blocked by
theophylline.

IV. INTERACTIONS WITH AMIODARONE
Antiarrhythmicd
Disopyramide, flecainide, procainamide and quinidine
amiodarone (5, 7, 27,
all increase QT interval and this effect increases the
82, 98)
risk of torsade de pointes since amiodarone also
increases QT interval.
Amiodarone also increases the plasma concentrations
of flecainide, procainamide and quinidine.
Two patients treated with a combination of
amiodarone and quinidine for minor arrhythmia both
developed dangerous atypical ventricular tachycardia
(torsade de pointes). Both patients had QT interval
prolongation. A combination of amiodarone and
quinidine given to normal subjects raised the plasma
quinidine concentration and prolonged the QT
interval, confirming the observation of a clinically
important and potentially dangerous interaction
between the two drugs.
Careful monitoring of the ECG for QT interval
prolongation and serum levels of quinidine is indicated
when amiodarone is added to quinidine treatment for
management of arrhythmias.

Anticoagulants/
amiodarone (82, 99,
100, 101)

The metabolism of nicoumalone and warfarin is
inhibited, i.e. the anticoagulant effect is increased with
consequent risk of bleeding.
Five of nine patients given amiodarone while on
established warfarin treatment presented with bleeding
phenomena 3-4 weeks later; warfarin dosage required
reduction by 30% to re-establish anticoagulant control;
these warfarin-potentiating effects persisted up to
4 months after amiodarone was stopped (99). The
addition of amiodarone on two occasions led to
dangerous increases in the anticoagulant effects of
warfarin in one patient (100). Other studies, both
animal (100) and human (101) have confirmed this
interaction.

INTERACTIONSWITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

129

Interaction

Anticonvulsant
agentdamiodarone
(4, 82)

The metabolism of phenytoin is inhibited leading to
increased plasma concentrations and increased risk of
phenytoin toxicity. The increased levels of free
phenytoin may also be due to plasma protein
displacement.

Antihistamines1
amiodarone (4, 29, 30,
34, 82)

Amiodarone increases the QT interval as do
astemizole and terfenadine. There is a risk of
developing torsade de pointes.

Antimalarials/
amiodarone (4, 23, 24,
31, 82)

Chloroquine , halofantrine, mefloquine and quinine all
increase the QT interval as does amiodarone. The risk
of torsade de pointes is high.

Anti-psychotic
drugdamiodarone
(4, 35, 36, 37, 39)

Phenothiazines and tri- and tetracyclic drugs increase
the QT interval and in combination with amiodarone
increase the risk of torsade de pointes.

Aprindinel
amiodarone (98-103)

Two cases have been reported in which amiodarone
caused increased serum aprindine concentrations
concomitant with the appearance of side effects in
patients who had achieved steady-state aprindine levels
before initiation of amiodarone therapy. Reduction of
daily aprindine dosage still yielded aprindine levels
higher than those prior to amiodarone. The mechanism
has not yet been established but it should be noted
that amiodarone has also been reported to increase
plasma concentration of warfarin and digoxin (99-102)
and quinidine (98) possibly by an effect on their
metabolism and on their protein binding. A similar
mechanism(s) may apply with aprindine.

P-Adrenergic

Given in combination with amiodarone, P-adrenergic
blockers increase the risk of bradycardia and AV block
and myocardial depression. Sotalol also increases the
QT interval and amiodarone also increases the QT
interval and in combination can cause torsade de
pointes.

blockers/amiodarone
(4, 38, 82)

130

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Calcium channel
blockers/amiodarone
(82)

Diltiazam and verapamil in combination with
amiodarone increase the risk of bradycardia, AV block
and myocardial depression.

Cardiac glycosides/
amiodarone (51, 82,
102)

Seven patients on steady maintenance digoxin
treatment had their plasma digoxin concentrations
raised by a mean of 69% after taking amiodarone
(600 mg daily); four of these patients developed
symptoms of digoxin toxicity. Amiodarone may
displace tissue-bound digoxin or interfere with digoxin
excretion.
Sharper increases in digoxin levels (66-800% ) have
been observed in (102) children. This exaggerated
effect was attributed to impaired renal clearance of
digoxin due to the inhibition of its tubular secretion
(this route of clearance being specially important in
children).

Diureticdamiodarone

Toxicity of amiodarone increased in the presence of
hypokalaemia induced by diuretics, e.g. acetazolamide,
loop diuretics and thiazides.

H2receptor antagonists/

Cimetidine increases the plasma levels of amiodarone.

amiodarone

V. INTERACTIONS WITH DISOPYRAMIDE
Anti-arrhythmicd
Disopyramide increases the QT interval. There is
disopyramide
therefore a risk of torsade de pointes if given with any
other anti-arrhythmic which also increases the QT
(4, 5 , 7, 9, 22, 38)

interval, e.g. flecainide, quinidine, procainamide,
amiodarone, sotalol and bretylium.
Antibacterials/
disopyramide
( 5 , 82, 104)

Plasma concentrations of disopyramide are reduced by
rifampicin but increased by erythromycin with
increased risk of disopyramide toxicity.
Rifampicin markedly increased the metabolism of
disopyramide (DIS) in patients; plasma levels and
AUC of disopyramide decreased while those of monoN-dealkyldisopyramide (MND) increased and the ratio
MNDIDIS in 24-hr urine increased distinctly in all
subjects studied. During rifampicin treatment the mean

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

131

Interaction

plasma levels of disopyramide did not reach the
predicted therapeutic range (2-5 ng/ml, although the
disopyramide doses used were loading doses generally
recommended. The renal clearance of disopyramide
declined after rifampicin (104).
Anticonvulsantd
disopyramide ( 5 )

Plasma concentrations of disopyramide are reduced by
anticonvulsants which induce cytochrome P450,e.g.
phenobarbitone, phenytoin and primidone.
Phenytoin markedly increased the metabolism of
disopyramide in one epileptic patient and in two
normal subjects (the effect subsided in 2 weeks after
stopping phenytoin). Plasma levels and AUC of
disopyramide decreased whilst those of its major
metabolite, mono-N-dealkyldisopyramide,increased
(11).
An additional report of two patients showing a
decrease in disopyramide serum concentration when
phenytoin was given concurrently confirms this
interaction which is likely to be due to enzyme
induction of hepatic metabolism of disopyramide (105).

Antihistamines/
disopyramide ( 5 , 29, 30,
34, 82)

Astemizole and tefenadine increase the QT interval. In
combination with disopyramide which also increases
the QT interval there is a risk of torsade de pointes.

Antimalarial
agentddisopyramide
(23, 24, 31, 82)

Disopyramide increases the QT interval. The risk of
torsade de pointes is increased if disopyramide is used
in combination with antimalarials which also increase
QT interval, e.g. halolfantrine, mefloquine, quinine.

Antipsychotic
agentddisopyramide (5,
20, 35, 36, 37)

Phenothiazines, tri- and tetracyclic antidepressants,
pimozide and haloperidol all increase the QT interval
and if given in combination with disopyramide carry a
risk of causing torsade de pointes.

Diuretics/
disopyramide (82)

Disopyramide toxicity is increased if diuretic-induced
hypokalaemia occurs.

132

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

VI. INTERACTIONS WITH LIGNOCAINE
Combination

Interaction

Anti-arrhythmic
agentdlignocaine (82)

When used in combination with other anti-arrhythmic
agents there is increased risk of myocardial depression.

0-Adrenergic
blockerdlignocaine
(106-108)

The use of lignocaine (lidocaine) is complicated by its
narrow therapeutic index; co-administration of
propranolol reduces its metabolic clearance. There is
therefore increased risk of myocardial depression.

Cimetidine/lignocaine
(109-11 1)

Cimetidine inhibits the metabolism of lignocaine and
increases the risk of toxicity.
Cimetidine (300 mg qid for 1 day) given to six normal
subjects reduced the systemic clearance of lignocaine
(lidocaine) (1 mg/kg per 10 min i.v. infusion) from 766
to 47 ml/min; the apparent volume of distribution at
steady state and the degree of plasma protein binding
of lignocaine were also decreased. Five of the six
subjects noted lignocaine toxicity during the cimetidine
infusion when peak lignocaine concentration was raised
by a mean of 50%. A further study of the effect of
cimetidine 300 mg four times a day on serum
lignocaine levels in 15 patients undergoing lignocaine
infusions of 1mg/kg per min to 3 mg/kg per min
confirmed substantial rises in serum lignocaine. Of the
15 patients who received lignocaine and cimetidine, six
had lignocaine concentrations in the toxic range (over
5 ng/ml), two becoming lethargic and confused (at
levels over 10 mg/ml).
The mechanism of this interaction appears to be
multifactorial, involving both altered distribution and
clearance; these are likely to be due to cimetidine’s
known inhibition of oxidative pathways of
biotransformation causing impaired metabolism of
lignocaine and a decrease in liver blood flow via its
vasoconstrictor effects on splanchnic circulation.
Side effects should be anticipated when i.v. lignocaine
is given to patients also receiving cimetidine. The total
dose of lignocaine should be infused slowly or given by
repeated small doses. Another report (110) cautions
against routine administration of cimetidine to patients

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

133

Interaction

receiving lignocaine unless lignocaine levels are
monitored.
Nitrates and
F’renylamine/
lignocaine (112)

Two elderly patients treated with sublingual nitrates
and prenylamine (now withdrawn from the market) for
stable angina suffered several episodes of syncope.
Both showed a prolonged QT interval with premature
ventricular beats and torsade de pointes type of
ventricular tachycardia. The male patient showed sinus
rhythm while the female had sinus bradycardia. After
bolus doses of lignocaine (male, 100 mg; female,
50 mg) both experienced AV block. Pacemakers were
inserted 3-5 days after withdrawal of prenylamine; the
QT interval returned to normal and ventricular
arrhythmias ceased. In two other patients with
prenylamine-induced tachycardia, lignocaine neither
precipitated AV block nor stopped the arrhythmias
which were treated by pacemaker overdrive
suppression. AV block after i.v. lignocaine is rare but
it is possible that prenylamine and lignocaine may
interact to cause AV conduction delays.

Smoking/lignocaine
(113)

Smokers had a significantly lower plasma-free fraction
of lignocaine than non-smokers (mean, 0.258 vs.
0.307). This 19% increase in protein binding of
lidocaine in smokers may be due to their higher
concentrations of al-acid glycoprotein. Lignocaine has
a narrow therapeutic index and smoking may negate its
therapeutic effect.

VII. INTERACTIONS WITH MEXILETINE
Anti-arrhythmid
Myocardial depression with any combination of antimexiletine (82)
arrhyt hmics
Antibacterials/
mexiletine (82)

Rifampicin accelerates mexiletine metabolism.

Anticonvulsants/
mexiletine (114)

Phenytoin accelerates mexiletine metabolism.
Unexpectedly low plasma concentrations of mexiletine
were observed in three patients treated with mexiletine
and concurrently taking phenytoin. A subsequent study

134

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anticonvulsantd
mexiletine cont.

in 6 normal subjects given a single oral dose of
mexiletine (400 mg) before and after 1 week of
phenytoin (300 mg/day) showed that the mean half-life
of elimination of mexiletine decreased from 17.2 to
8.4 hr; the mean AUC decreased from 17.67 to
6.21 ng/ml/hr. This enhanced clearance of mexiletine is
likely to be due to induction of hepatic cytochrome
P450 isoenzymes.

Diuretics/mexiletine (82)

Actions of mexiletine were antagonized in the presence
of diuretic-induced hypokalaemia.

Lignocaine and
Procainamide/
mexiletine
(97)

Concomitant intravenous administration of lignocaine
or procainamide is not recommended by the
manufacturer.

Theophylline/
mexiletine (82)

Mexiletine increases the plasma level of theophylline

VIII. INTERACTIONS WITH PROCAINAMIDE
Alcohol/procainamide
Alcohol (ethanol) 2 hr before or 1.5 hr after oral
procainamide (10 mg/kg) in normal subjects reduced
(115)
the half-life and increased total body clearance and
acetylation rate of procainamide. Alcohol caused
greater enhancement of the total clearance in the slow
than in the rapid acetylators. The mechanism of this
interaction is not clear but it is likely to be due to
increased formation of acetyl-CoA originating from
acetate produced during ethanol metabolism, or to
hepatic concentration of acetyl-CoA.
Antacids/
procainamide (117)

Antacids reduce the bioavailability of procainamide.

Antihypertensive
agentdprocainamide
(116-118)

Additive hypotensive effects may occur; this is most
likely with intravenous (i.v.) or intramuscular (i.m.)
procainamide which can produce hypotensive effects
when given alone. This interaction is seen very
infrequently with oral procainamide (116).
If procainamide is given i.v. or i.m. the progress of

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

135

Interaction

patients receiving antihypertensive therapy should be
carefully monitored for possible additive hypotensive
effects.
Severe hypotension may be treated by placing the
patient in the supine position with the feet raised. If
necessary an iv infusion of noradrenaline acid tartrate
(8 ng/ml in sodium chloride injection) may be started
(117) or adrenaline (118).
Anti-Whythmic
agentdprocainamide
(4, 5, 7, 9, 22, 82)

Amiodarone increases procainamide plasma
concentration. Procainamide increases QT interval and
should not be used with any other anti-arrhythmic,
which has the same action, e.g. flecainide, quinidine,
disopyramide, sotalol or bretylium.
A single case has been reported in which neurological
side effects (hallucination and delirium) followed the
combined use of procainamide and lignocaine.

Antibacterials/
procainamide (82, 119,
120)

Trimethoprim increases the plasma levels of
procainamide (82).
The antibacterial action of sulphonamides is
antagonized by p-aminobenzoic acid and compounds
derived from it, especially procaine and related
compounds (which include procainamide) .
Procainamide potentiates the neuromuscular blocking
action of aminoglycoside antibiotics (119, 120).

Antihistamines/
procainamide
(7, 29, 30, 34)

There is an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias
and torsade de pointes when procainamide is given
concomitantly with astemizole or terfenadine, since
these drugs, like procainamide, increase the QT
interval.

Antimalarials/
procainamide
(23, 24, 31)

Halofantrine and other antimalarial agents increase the
QT interval as does procainamide. Given
concomitantly there is an increased risk of ventricular
arrhythmias including torsade de pointes.

Cimetidine/
procainamide
(82, 121, 122, 123)

Cimetidine increases procainamide plasma
concentrations by reducing the renal clearance of
procainamide ,
Pharmacokinetic studies in six normal subjects showed

136

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Cimetidine/
procainamide cont.

that cimetidine (1000 mg on 1 day) concurrently with
procainamide (1 g orally as a single dose) increased the
AUC of procainamide plasma concentration by an
average of 35%. Mean elimination half-life of
procainamide was prolonged from 2.9 to 3.8 hr. The
interaction was not due to inhibition of procainamide
metabolism but to a 50% reduction in renal clearance
(347 reduced to 196 ml/min), which was presumably
due to cimetidine-induced reduction in renal blood
flow, or competition for active tubular secretion, or
both. Procainamide has a narrow therapeutic index
and caution is warranted when using it in patients also
receiving cimetidine, especially in the elderly who have
a reduced ability to clear both drugs (122, 123).
Dosage modification may be necessary.

Cholinergic
drugs/procainamide

Procainamide has anticholinergic properties and may
reduce the effect of drugs used in the treatment of
myasthenia gravis and possibly also those used in
glaucoma.
Note: Quinidine also has anticholinergic properties.

Skeletal muscle
reIaxants/
procainamide
(82, 119)

Neuromuscular blocking action may be enhanced by
procainamide; recurarization is possible during
recovery from neuromuscular blockade.
Note: Qunidine also potentiates muscle relaxant drugs
and may cause recurarization.

IX. DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH PROPAFENONE
Anti-arrhythmia/
Quinidine increases the plasma concentration of
propafenone (11, 20)
propafenone.
Increased myocardial depression when given
concomitantly with any anti-arrhythmic.
Antibacterials/
propafenone (11)

Rifampicin reduces plasma concentration of
propafenone.

Anticoagulants/
propafenone (11)

Propafenone increases the anticoagulant effect of
warfarin and nicoumalone.

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

137

Interaction

Antihistamines/
propafenone (20)

Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias with
astemizole and terfenadine, both of which increase QT
interval.

P-adrenergic blockers/
propafenone (11)

Propafenone when given concomitantly with either
metoprolol or propranolol causes increased plasma
concentration of these drugs.

Cardiac glycosides/
propafenone (11)

Propafenone increases plasma concentration of digoxin

Cimetidine/
propafenone (11)

Cimetidine leads to increased plasma propafenone
levels

Cholinergicd
propafenone (82)

Propafenone has been reported to antagonize the
effects of neostigmine and pyridostigmine

Ketoconazole/
propafenone (147)

This combination has been reported to result in
generalized seizures.

Theophylline/
propafenone (82)

Propafenone when given in combination with
theophylline leads to increased plasma theophylline
levels.

X. DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH QUINIDINE
Amiloride/quinidine
This combination has been reported to lead to an
exaggeration of the effects of quinidine on the QRS
(148)
complex. Amiloride can prolong the QT interval in its
own right.
Amiodarone/
quinidine (103)

Two patients treated with a combination of
amiodarone and quinidine for minor arrhythmia both
developed dangerous atypical ventricular tachycardia
(torsade de pointes). Both patients had QT-interval
prolongation. A combination of amiodarone and
quinidine given to normal subjects raised the plasma
quinidine concentration and prolonged the QTinterval, confirming the observation of a clinically
important and potentially dangerous interaction
between the two drugs.

138

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antaciddquinidine

Reduced excretion of quinidine takes place in alkaline
urine. Plasma quinidine levels may be increased.

Anti-arrhythmic
agentdquinidine (20)

Quinidine increases QT interval and should not be
used with any other anti-arrhythmic agent which has
this effect.

Antibacterial
agentdquinidine
(124, 125, 149)

Rifampicin increases rate of quinidine metabolism. The
significance of this interaction can be judged from the
following case histories.
Ventricular dysrhythmia responded to treatment with
quinidine but the patient relapsed when rifampicin was
started to treat co-existing tuberculosis (124).
Pharmacokinetic studies in normal subjects showed
that the mean elimination half-life of oral quinidine
was reduced by rifampicin (6.1-2.3 hr). The mean
AUC fell from 15.5 to 2.6 ng/ml/min/kg.
Corresponding data for i.v. quinidine were a reduction
from 6.6 to 2.1 hr and 10.3 to 5.2 ng/ml/min/kg,
respectively (125). Addition or discontinuation of
rifampicin may have serious implications for patients
receiving quinidine.
Erythromycin has been reported to increase quinidine
blood levels (149).

Anticoagulants/
quinidine (126-128)

Anticoagulant effects of warfarin and nicoumalone are
enhanced.

Anticholinergic
agentdquinidine
(129)

Quinidine has vagal blocking properties and exerts
additive vagolytic effects in the presence of
anticholinergic drugs (129).
Caution should be observed in giving quinidine and
anticholinergic drugs concomitantly; many
antisecretory , spasmolytic and anti-Parkinsonian drugs
have predominant anticholinergic properties, as also
have anti-emetic agents and mydriatics.

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

139

Interaction

Anticonvulsantd
quinidine

Phenobarbitone, phenytoin and primidone increase the
rate of metabolism of quinidine and reduce its effect.

Antihistamines/
quinidine
(29, 30, 34)

Astemizole and terfenadine increase the QT interval as
does quinidine. Given concomitantly there is an
increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias and torsade
de pointes.

Antihypertensive
agentdquinidine
(129, 130)

Quinidine reduces blood pressure, primarily due to
peripheral vasodilation; it may also cause a precipitous
fall in blood pressure as part of a hypersensitivity
reaction. Thus, additive hypotensive effects may occur
when quinidine is given concomitantly with
antihypertensive therapy.
Patients stabilized on antihypertensive drugs should be
carefully monitored if quinidine is given parenterally or
in high oral dosage. Additive hypotensive effects may
occur.

Antimalarials
agentdquinidine
(22, 23, 24, 31)

A number of antimalarials, e.g. halofantrine increase
the QT interval and, when taken in combination with
quinidine, can induce ventricular arrhythmias and
torsade de pointes.

Antipsychotic
agentdquinidine
(22, 39)

Phenothiazines, tri- and tetracyclic drugs primazide
and haloperidol like quinidine increase the QT
interval. When administered concomitantly there is
increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias and torsade
de pointes.

Calcium channel
blockers/quinidine

Nifedipine reduces plasma quinidine concentrations.
Verapamil increases plasma quinidine concentrations.
There is a risk of serious hypotension.

Cardiac
glycosides/quinidine
digoxidquinidine
(52-64)

Quinidine causes an increase in serum digoxin
concentration in 90% of cases; increase is variable but
averages two-fold and the raised levels are maintained
as long as quinidine is co-administered (52).
Mechanism of interaction suggested is displacement of
digoxin from tissue binding sites (57, 58), thus
reducing its distribution volume (54,59), and this is
followed by decreased renal clearance of digoxin

140

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Cardiac
glycosidedquinidine
digoxin/quinidine
cont.

(52-54, 58, 60) which is saturable (68), and this is the
determinant of the serum level during the steady state
(59) *
The underlying mechamisms are a quinidine-induced
reduction of both renal and non-renal clearance of
digoxin, and a quinidine-induced redistribution of
digoxin from tissue binding sites (57-58), notably a
reduction in the ratio of skeletal muscle to serum
digoxin levels. This is suggestive of a reduced binding
of digoxin in muscle (61-64).

digitoxidquinidine
(70-74)

Although it is well established that a digoxin-quinidine
interaction increases plasma digoxin levels, a
corresponding interaction between digitoxin and
quinidine is still somewhat controversial. A random
cross-over study in 10 normal subjects showed that the
two drugs could be taken together without evoking
change in dipitoxin kinetics. These negative findings
have been questioned and other studies have shown
that digitoxin serum levels increased after starting
quinidine.

Cholinergic
drugdquinidine (129)

Quinidine has anticholinergic properties and may
reduce the effects of drugs used in the treatment of
myasthenia gravis and possibly also those used in
glaucoma.
The progress of patients on cholinergic drugs should be
carefully checked if quinidine is given. In particular,
quinidine may antagonize the effects of neostigmine
and edrophonium in the treatment of myasthenia
gravis.
Note: Procainamide also has anticholinergic properties.

Diureticdquinidine
( 131- 134)

Acetazolamide reduces the renal excretion of
quinidine, as also do thiazide diuretics.
These diuretics tend to make the urine alkaline; this
results in an increased proportion of un-ionized
quinidine. Renal tubular reabsorption of quinidine is
thus increased and serum levels may rise, thereby
increasing the risk of side effects and toxicity. In
addition, thiazides and parenteral quinidine may
exhibit additive hypotensive effects.

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Combination

141

Interaction

Care should always be used in prescribing urine
alkalinizing agents (this includes sodium bicarbonate)
for patients receiving quinidine.
Quinidine toxicity is enhanced in the presence of
diuretic-induced hypokalaemia.
Cimetidine/quinidine
(82, 135)

Cimetidine inhibits quinidine metabolism. Antacids,
not cimetidine, may be the preferred choice in acutely
ill patients who are receiving concurrent treatment
with cardio-active drugs.

F’ropranolol/quinidine
(136-137)

Both quinidine and propranolol have a negative
ionotropic action on the heart.

Skeletal muscle
relaxantdquinidine
(138, 139, 140)

Quinidine administration to patients recovering from
the effects of tubocurarine leads to recurarization and
apnoea. Quinidine potentiates both depolarizing and
non-depolarizing (curare-like) muscle relaxants.
Avoid the use of quinidine pre- and postoperatively.
Neostigmine does not reverse this blockade.
Note: Procainamide cannot be substituted since a
similar interaction may occur.

Sucralfate/quinidine
(145)

Reduced absorption of both digoxin and quinidine with
markedly below expected levels of both in a 71-yearold woman lead to atrial flutter, rapid ventricular
response and chest pain.

Timolol eye
dropdquinidine
(146)

Timolol eye drops have been reported in combination
with quinidine to have enhanced the negative
ionotropic action of quinidine on the heart.

XI. INTERACTIONS WITH VERAPAMIL
(see also section on antihypertensive drugs)
Combination

Calcium adipate and
calciferol/verapamil
(141)

Interaction

Atrial fibrillation reappeared after 1 week’s dosage
with calcium adipinate (1.2 g/day) and calciferol (3000
IU/day) in an elderly patient successfully treated with
verapamil for atrial fibrillation of long duration. The

142

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Calcium adipate and
calciferol/verapamil
cont.

patient reconverted to sinus rhythm after i.v.
verapamil, fluids and frusemide. Verapamil inhibits the
transmembranal influx of calcium into cardiac cells and
the release of calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum
causing a negative inotropic effect. This effect was
reversed in this case by the increase in extracellular
concentration of calcium.

Clonidine/verapamil
(143)

The combination of clonidine with verapamil has lead
to AV block and severe hypotension.

Digoxin/verapamil
(86, 87, 88)

In normal subjects verapamil significantly decreased
the mean volume of distribution of digoxin from 0.83
to 0.64 l/kg, and digoxin total body clearance from
3.28 to 2.15 ml/min/kg; both renal and extrarenal
clearance were impaired. Verapamil may inhibit renal
clearance of digoxin by inhibiting tubular secretion.
Mean elimination half-life of digoxin increased by 31%
(76). Significant increases in digoxin serum
concentrations (0.76 to 1.31ng/ml) have also been
reported following the use of verapamil (240 mg daily)
in 49 patients who were previously stabilized on
digoxin; symptoms of toxicity occurred in several
patients (77).
Frequent plasma digoxin measurements and adequate
digoxin dosage reduction are recommended to avoid
unnecessary risks during the combined use of digoxin
and verapamil (76-78).

Glibenclamide/
verapamil (142)

Verapamil (120 mg orally) has been shown to increase
the plasma levels of glibenclamide ( 5 mg orally) in nine
male volunteers. The area under the time-plasma
concentration curve was increased by about 25%. In
the male volunteers tested there was no effect on
plasma glucose or insulin.

Metoprolol/verapamil
(144)

This combination has been reported to have resulted in
cardiogenic shock and complete heart block

Rifampicin/verapamil
(143)

Rifampicin increases the hepatic metabolism of
verapamil.
Normal doses of verapamil are unlikely to give

INTERACTIONSWITH CARDIAC DRUGS

Cornbination

143

Interaction

therapeutically effective plasma levels in patients
taking rifampicin.
Recommended further reading
Thomas SHL. (1994) Drugs, QT interval abnormalities and Ventricular arrhythmias. Adverse
Drug React Toxic01 Rev 13, 77-102.

REFERENCES

1 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
949-950 (enoximone).
2 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1587-1588 (milrinone).
3 British National Formulary. (1994) No. 27, page 90.
4 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1550-1553 (amiodarone).
5 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1497-1499 (disopyramide).
6 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
940-942 (flecainide).
7 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
145-146 (procainamide).
8 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
136-137 (quinidine).
9 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1918-1919 (bretylium tosylate).
10 Sneader W. (1985) Drug Discovery, the evaluation of modern medicines. John Wiley &
Sons Ltd, Chichester, p. 149.
11 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
751-752 (propafenone).
12 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
151-152 (tocainide).
13 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
159-160 (lignocaine).
14 Jervell A, Lange-Neilsen F. (1957) Am Heart J 54, 59.
15 Moss AJ, Schwartz MD. (1982) Modern Concepts Cardiovasc Dis 5 , 85.
16 Algra A et al. (1991) Circulation 83, 188.
17 Schouten E et al. (1991) Circulation 84, 1516.
18 Dessertene F. (1966) Arch Ma1 Coeur Vaisseaux 59, 263.
19 Jackman WM et al. (1988) Prog Cardiovasc Dis 31, 115.
20 Thomas M et al. (1996) Br J Clin Pharmacol41, 77.
21 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
947-8 (probucol),
22 Roden DM et al. (1986) Am Heart J 111, 1088.
23 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1438-40 (mefloquine).
24 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1719-20 (halofantrine).

144

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

25 Gimeno G et al. (1980) Rev Argent Cardio 48, 337.
26 Wong CS et al. (1990) Lancet 336, 1396.
27 Kaye GC. (1990) Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 4, 1157.
28 Ahmad RS et al. (1995) Lancet 345, 508.
29 McConnell TJ, Stanners AJ. (1991) Br Med J 302, 1469.
30 Wiley JF et al. (1992) J Paediatrics 120, 799.
31 Karbwang J et al. (1993) Lancet 342, 501.
32 Funck-Bretano C et al. (1990) Am J Cardiol66, 812.
33 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
739-40 (cisapride).
34 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
960 (terfenadine).
35 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
737-8 (pimozide).
36 Fulop G et al. (1987) Am J Psychiatry 144, 673.
37 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
729-31 (haloperidol).
38 Sotacor (sotalol) Revised Data Sheet circulated to the medical profession, March 1996,
by Bristol Myers Squibb.
39 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1386-88 (chlorpromazine); A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp. 1935-38 (digoxin).
40 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
745-746 (itraconazole).
41 Caldwell JH et al. (1971) J Clin Invest 50, 2638.
42 Bazzano G , Bazzano GS. (1972) J A M A 220, 828.
43 Carruthers SC, Dujovne CA. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 27, 184.
44 Dundee JW and McDowell SA. (1971) In: General Anaesthesia, 3rd ed, Vol 11, London,
Butterworths, pp. 1-20.
45 Khalil SAH. (1974) 1 Pharm Pharmacol26, 961.
46 Brown DD, Juhl RP. (1976) N Engl J Med 295, 1034.
47 Van der Vijgh WJF et al. (1976) Drug Intel1 Clin Pharm 10, 680.
48 D’Arcy PF et al. (1976) J Pharm Pharmacol28, Suppl 33.
49 McElnay JC et al. (1978) Br Med J 1 , 1554.
50 Moysey JO et al. (1981) Br Med J 282, 272.
51 Koren G et al. (1984) J Pediatr 104, 467.
52 Doering W. (1979) N Engl J Med 301, 400.
53 Leahey EB jun et al. (1978) Circulation 5 8 , Suppl 2 , 11.
54 Dahlqvist R et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol 13, 286.
55 Small RE, Marshall JH. (1979) Drug Zntell Clin Pharm 13, 286.
56 Ochs HR et al. (1980) Clin Pharmacokinet 5 , 150.
57 Leahey EB jun et al. (1979) Arch Intern Med 139, 519.
58 Hager WD et al. (1979) N Engl J Med 300, 1238.
59 Pedersen KE et al. (1980) N Engl J Med 302, 176.
60 Hooymans PM, Merkus FWHM. (1978) Br Med J 2, 1022.
61 Schenck-Gustafsson K. (1981) Lancet i, 105.
62 Schenck-Gustafsson K, Dahlquvst R. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacol 11, 181.
63 Aronson JK, Carver JG. (1981) Lancet i , 1418.
64 Schenck-Gustafsson K et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 209.
65 Fichtl B, Doering W. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacol 11, 94.
66 Doering W et al. (1982) Eur J Clin Pharmacol21, 281.
67 Holt DW et al. (1979) Br Med J 2 , 1401.
68 Moench TR. (1980) N Engl J Med 302, 864.

INTERACTIONS WITH CARDIAC DRUGS

145

69 Bigger JT. (1979) N EnglJ Med 301, 779.
70 Ejvinsson G. (1978) Br Med J 1, 279.
71 Rollins DE, Garty M. (1980) N Engl J Med 304, 118.
72 Garty M et al. (1981) A n n Intern Med 94, 35.
73 Melvin KR, Kates RE. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 118.
74 Fenster PE et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 118.
75 Lindenbaum J et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 789.
76 Doherty JE et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 827.
77 Friedman HS, Bonventre MV. (1982) Chest 82, 202.
78 Novi C et al. (1980) J A M A 244, 2521.
79 Peters U et al. (1974) Dtsch Med Wochenschr 99, 2381.
80 Boman G et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol 10, 89.
81 Peterson P et al. (1985) Acta Med Scand 217, 423.
82 British National Formulary No 31 (1996) Appendix 1.
83 Miller RP, Bates JH. (1969) Ann Intern Med 71, 1089.
84 Azarnoff DL, Hurwitz A. (1970) Pharmacol Phys 4, 1.
85 Gallet M et al. (1984) Presse Med 13, 3455.
86 Pedersen KE et al. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 30, 311.
87 Klein HO et al. (1982) Circulation 65, 998.
88 Belz GG et al. (1981) Lancet i, 844.
89 Martindale Reynolds JEF (ed) (1993) The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th ed, London,
Pharmaceutical Press, p . 667.1.
90 Dowdy EG et al. (1965) Anesth Analg Curr Res 44, 608.
91 Birch AA et al. (1969) JAMA 210, 490.
92 Harris EA et al. (1960) Br Med J 2, 1049.
93 Sherrod TR. (1967) Hosp Pract 2, 56.
94 Smith JW (ed) (1969) Manual of Medical Therapeutics, 19th ed, Boston, Little Brown
&. CO., pp. 96-105.
95 D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP (ed) (1972) Iatrogenic Diseases, London, Oxford University Press,
pp. 18, 48.
96 Scheffing JL, Lasagna L. (1967) Clin Pharmacol Ther 8, 256.
97 A B P l Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
252-253 (mexilitine).
98 Tartini R et al. (1982) Lancet i, 1327.
99 Martinowitz U et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 671.
100 Rees A et al. (1981) Br Med J 282, 1756.
101 Heger JL et al. (1981) N En@ J Med 305, 539.
102 Moysey JO et al. (1981) Br Med J 282, 272.
103 Southworth W et al. (1982) Am Heart J 104, 323.
104 Aitio ML et al. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacol 11, 279.
105 Kessler JM et al. (1982) Clin Pharm 1, 263.
106 Ochs HR et al. (1980) N Engl Med 303, 373.
107 Graham CF et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 1301.
108 Bax NDS et al. (1985) Br J Clin Pharmacol 19, 597.
109 Feely J et al. (1982) A n n Intern Med 96, 592.
110 Knapp AB. (1982) JAMA 247, 3174.
111 Knapp AB et al. (1983) A n n Intern Med 98, 174.
112 Grenadier E et al. (1982) Postgrad Med J 58, 175.
113 McNamara PJ et al. (1980) J Pharm Sci 69, 749.
114 Begg EJ et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 14, 219.
115 Olsen H, Moreland J. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 13, 203.
116 Smith JW (ed) (1969) Manual of Medical Therapeutics, 19th ed, Boston, Little, Brown
& CO., pp. 119-22.

146

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

117 Martindale Reynolds JEF (ed) (1993), The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th ed, London,
Pharmaceutical Press, p. 69.3.
118 Koch-Weser J et al. (1973) Chest 32, 727.
119 Cuthbert MF. (1966) Br J Anaesth 38, 775.
120 Harrah MD et al. (1970) Anesthesiology 33, 406.
121 Somogyi A, Heinzow B. (1982) N Engl J Med 307, 1080.
122 Reidenberg MM et al. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 28, 732.
123 Gugler R, Somogyi A. (1977) N Engl J Med 301, 435.
124 Ahmad D et al. (1979) Br J Dis Chest 73, 409.
125 Twum-Barima Y, Carruthers SG. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 1466.
126 Koch-Weser J. (1969) Ann Intern Med 68, 511.
127 Gazzaniga AB, Stewart DR. (1969) N Engl J Med 280, 711.
128 Udall JA. (1969) A m J Cardiol23, 143.
129 Hansten PD. (1975) Drug Interactions, 3rd ed, Philadephia, Lea & Febiger, p. 19.
130 Packman RC (ed) Manual of Medical Therapeutics, 18th ed, Boston, Little, Brown &
Co., p. 114.
131 Milne MD. (1965) Proc R SOC Med 58, 961.
132 Knouss RF et al. (1968) Ann Intern Med 68, 1157.
133 Gerhardt RE et al. (1969) Ann Intern Med 71, 927.
134 Polish LB et al. (1981) Southern Med J 74, 633.
135 Stern S. (1966) Am Heart J 72, 569.
136 Dreifus LS et al. (1968) JAMA 204, 736.
137 Schmidt JL et al. (1963) JAMA 183, 669.
138 McIver AK. (1968) Pharm J 199, 205.
139 Way WL et al. (1967) JAMA 200, 153.
140 Bar-Or D , Yoel G . (1982) Br Med J 282, 1585.
141 Semple CG et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol22, 187.
142 Rahn KK et al. (1985) N Engl J Med 312, 920.
143 Jaffe R et al. (1994) Ann Pharmacother 28, 881.
144 Lee DW, Cohan B. (1985) Angiology 46,517.
145 Rey AM, Gums JG (1991) Ann Pharmacother 25, 745.
146 Edeki TI et al. (1995) JAMA 274, 1611.
147 Duvelleroy HC et al. (1995) Therapie 50, 164.
148 Wang L et al. (1994) Clin Pharmacol Ther 55, 28.
149 Spinker SA et al. (1995) Clin Pharmacol Ther 57, 89.
150 Midoneck SR, Etingin OR. (1995) N Engl J Med 333, 1505.

2.2. INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED
TO TREAT HYPERTENSION
A wide variety of active substances with an equally wide number of primary pharmacological effects have been and are used to treat hypertension. This chapter has
therefore been divided into a number of sections dealing with each of the various
categories of antihypertensive agent and their interactions according to the primary
pharmacological action of that class of agent. The order in which the therapeutic
groups are presented has been determined by the current volume of clinical use of
these categories.
1. P-ADRENERGIC BLOCKING DRUGS
Group 1.
Cardioselective P-adrenergic blocking agents
Acebutolol
Atenolol
Bet axolol
Bisoprolol
Esmalal
Metoprolol

Group 2.

Non-cardioselective P-adrenergic blocking agents
Alprenolol hydrochloride
Bufuralol hydrochloride
Bunitrolol
Bupranolol hydrochloride
Nadolol
Oxprenolol
Pindolol
Propranolol
Sotalol"
Timolol
Toliprolol

Group 3.

Combined a-and P-adrenergic blocking agents
Labetalol hydrochloride

*Sotalol prolongs QT interval and should not be administered with other drugs that prolong QT interval.
There is increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias and torsade de pointes.

147

148

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Interactions with P-adrenergic blocking agents
Combination

Anti-arrhythmic
gentslP-adrenergic
blocking drugs
AmiodaronelPadrenergic blocking
agent (1)

Interaction

Increased risk of myocardial depression and severe
bradycardia and AV block

Calcium channel
blockerslP-adrenergic
blocking agents (1)

The combined use of p-adrenocaptor blocking drugs
with calcium channel blocking agents with negative
ionotropic effects such as verapamil or diltiazam can
lead to exaggeration of these ionotropic effects,
particularly in patients with impaired ventricular
function and/or sinuatrial or atrial ventricular
conduction abnormalities. This may result in severe
hypotension, bradycardia and cardiac failure. Neither
the p-adrenoceptor blocking drug nor the calcium
channel blocker should be administered within 48 hr of
discontinuing the other, concomitant therapy with
dihydropyridines. Calcium channel blockers, such as
nifedipine, may increase the risk of hypotension and
cardiac failure.

Nifedipine/atenolol
(2-6)

A case report has shown that the combination of
nifedipine and a P-blocker (atenolol) may cause
cardiac failure in patients with angina (2). This
confirms an earlier report of two cases of the same
interaction (3). Nifedipine and P-blockade have also
been implicated in causing severe hypotension (4, 5 ) .
The mechanism of these interactions is that increased
cardiac sympathetic activity compensates for the
negative inotropic effect of nifedipine, but this is
prevented by P-blockade (6).

Digitalis/propranolol
(7, 8)

Propranolol is used with digitalis to reduce the
ventricular rate in auricular fibrillation and flutter
which are not effectively controlled by digitalis alone
(7). Propranolol is also usually effective in controlling
arrhythmias associated with digitalis intoxication (7),
but may potentiate digitalis bradycardia (8). These

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

Combination

149

Interaction

uses are due to the drug’s membrane-stabilizing actions
rather than to its p-adrenergic blocking action.
Disopyramide/
propranolol, atenolol,
etc. (1, 9)

The propranolol data sheet extends the caution of coadministration to all p-blockers and all class I antiarrhythmic agents. After 1 week treatment with
atenolol (100 mg daily by mouth) the mean clearance
of disopyramide in six patients with cardiac ischaemia
and in three normal volunteers decreased by almost
20%. This modest reduction in the clearance of
disopyramide may be sufficient to exaggerate the
pharmacodynamic interaction between disopyramide
and p-blocking drugs.

Lidocaine/propranolol
(10)

The use of lidocaine (lignocaine) is complicated by its
narrow therapeutic index; co-administration of
propranolol reduces its metabolic clearance during
prolonged infusion and this will increase the likelihood
of toxicity. Two cases of this interaction evoking
lidocaine toxicity have been reported.

Lignocainel
propranolol (1, 11)

Increased risk of lignocaine toxicity when given in
conjunction with propranolol, since the plasma
concentration of lignocaine rises by 30% or more.

Procainamide/
propranolol (12)

Elimination half-life was increased and plasma
clearance of procainamide was decreased in normal
subjects receiving long-term administration of
propranolol as compared with controls. The clinical
significance of this interaction is unknown but it may
be important due to the common use of the two drugs.

Anaesthetic agents/
P-adrenergic agents
1, 11)

There is enhanced risk of hypotension when patients
on p-adrenergic blocking drugs are anaesthetized. The
use of p-adrenergic blocking drugs with anaesthetic
agents results in the attenuation of reflex tachycardia
in response to hypotension.

Antibiotics, rifampicin/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents (13)

Rifampicin (600 mg at night) for 15 days reduced the
AUC of metoprolol (single oral dose 100 mg) in
normal subjects but did not change the rate constant
for elimination from plasma. This change in kinetics of

150

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antibiotics, rifampicin/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents cont.

metoprolol is likely to be due to induction of hepatic
microsomal enzymes by rifampicin, since in the same
study rifampicin also reduced the AUC and increased
the elimination rate constant for antipyrine, an
indicator of hepatic mixed-oxidase activity.
Some loss of P-blockade should be anticipated if
rafampicin is given to patients who receive metoprolol.

Antidepressants
(MAOIs)/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents (16)

The use of MAOIs with P-adrenergic blocking agents
is contraindicated, since a severe hypertensive crisis
may be precipitated because of unopposed
a-adrenergic activity in patients receiving
sympathomimetic amines.

Antidepressants
(fluvoxamine)/
propanolol

The SSRI fluvoxamine inhibits propranolol metabolism
and increases risk of severe hypotension.

Antidiabetic agents/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents (11, 19, 20, 22,
23)

Propranolol enhances the hypoglycaemic effect of
antidiabetic agents and masks the warning isgns of
hypoglycaemia, e.g. tremor sweating.
P-adrenergic blockade reduces the rise in blood sugar
to adrenaline. Propranolol blunts the rebound of blood
sugar following insulin-induced hypoglycaemia; it also
blocks the clinical signs of hypoglycaemia, such as
sweating and trembling, by which patients and/or
relatives recognise hypoglycaemic episodes. However,
cardioselective P-blockade with metoprolol reduced
blood pressure satisfactorily in a group of insulindependent diabetics. No influence was observed on
parameters reflecting diabetic control; patients able to
recognize symptoms of insulin-induced hypoglycaemia
maintained this ability during metoprolol treatment
(19). Other studies in non-insulin-dependent diabetics
have also indicated that the use of a selective Pblocker (acebutolol) has advantages over a nonselective blocker (propranolol) (20).
Use this combination (propranolol/insulin) with
caution; dosage of insulin may have to be reduced by
20% if /3-adrenergic blockade is required. This caution

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

Combination

151

Interaction

does not appear to apply if cardioselective p-blockers
are used (e.g. acebutolol, metoprolol).
Antihistamines/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents (sotalol) (11, 15)

The risk of ventricular arrhythmias due to prolongation
of the QT interval associated with sotalol is
potentiated by the non-sedative antihistamines
astemizole and terfenidine, there is a risk of torsade de
pointes.

Antihistamines/H2
receptor blockers/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents (11, 18)

Plasma concentrations of propranolol and labetalol
increased by cimetidine.

Antihypertensive
agentslp-adrenergic
blocking agents
(clonidine) (11)

Both propranolol and cimetidine have been reported
to cause male impotence. This effect may be
potentiated when co-administered. p-Adrenergic
blocking agents exacerbate rebound hypertension
which can follow the withdrawal of clonidine. If the
two agents are administered together for the control of
hypertension the p-adrenergic blocking drug should be
withdrawn several days before the subsequent
withdrawal of clonidine.

Antimalarials/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents (11, 14, 15)

Risk of ventricular arrhythmias associated with sotalol
potentiated by halofantrine, due to prolongation of QT
interval. Increased risk of bradycardia with
mefloquine.

Antipsychotic agents/&
adrenergic blocking
agents
(11, 14, 15)

Risk of ventricular arrhythmias associated with sotalol
increased by phenothiazines, and tricyclic
antidepressants due to prolongation of QT interval.

Antithyroid
drugs/propranolol
(11, 17)

Plasma propranolol steady-state concentrations
increased significantly after correction of thyroid
disorder in hyperthyroid patients by surgery,
antithyroid drugs or radio-iodine.
Thyroxine increases the rate of metabolism of
propranolol and other p-adrenergic blockers.
Propranolol may be used to control hyperthyroid
tremor, and when the hyperthyroidism is corrected

152

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antithyroid
drugs/propranolol
Cont.

there may be unexpected and a severe hypotensive
episode.

Diuretics/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents (11)

Enhanced hypotensive effect when thiazides and padrenergic blockers are co-administered. Increased risk
of ventricular arrhythmias due to prolongation of QT
interval with sotalol in presence of diuretic induced Kf
depletion.

Ergot alkaloids/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents (1, 11)

Caution must be exercised if ergotamine, dihydroergotamine or other ergot alkaloids are given at the
same time as propranolol or other p-adrenergic
blockers since severe peripheral vasospastic reactions
have been reported with risk of loss of digits.

Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory
agents/S-adrenergic
blocking agents (1)

Concomitant use of prostaglandin synthetase inhibiting
NSAIDs such as ibuprofen, indomethacin, etc.,
decreases the hypotensive effect of propranolol.

Sex hormones/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents (1, 11)

Oestrogens, combined oral contraceptives and HRT
antagonize the hypotensive effect of p-adrenergic
blocking drugs.

Skeletal muscle
relaxants/
P-adrenergic blockers
(1)

Propranolol potentiates the muscle relaxant effect of
these agents.
Use of p-adrenergic receptor blocking drugs with
anaesthetic agents may result in the attenuation of the
reflex tachcardia and increase the risk of hypotension.
Anaesthetic agents that depress myocardial function
should be avoided.

Sympathomimetic
amineslp-adrenergic
blocking agents (11)

Severe hypertension with adrenaline and noradrenaline
especially with non selective @blockers occurs due to
unopposed a-adrenergic effects.
Severe hypertension has also been reported with
sympathomimetic amines in anorectic, cough and cold
remedies being taken by patients receiving padrenergic blocking drugs.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

153

2. ANGIOTENSIN CONVERTING-ENZYME (ACE) INHIBITORS

Captopril
Cilazapril
Enalapril maleate

Fasinopril
Lisinopril
Perindopril
Quinapril
Ramipril
Trandolapril

available as 1 2 5 , 25.0- and 50.0-mg tablets and 50 mg
in combination with 25 mg hydrochlorthiazide
available as 250-, 500- and 1.0-, 2.5- and 5.0-mg tablets
available as 2 . 5 , 5.0-, 10.0- and 20.0-mg tablets and
20.0 mg enalapril in combination with 12.5 mg
hydrochlorthiazide
available as 10.0- and 20.0-mg tablets
available as 2.5, 5.0-, 10.0- and 20.0-mg tablets and
10 mg in combination with 12.5 mg hydrochlorthiazide
available as 2.0- and 4.0-mg tablets
available as 5.0-, 10.0- and 20.0-mg tablets and 10 mg
in combination with 12.5 mg hydrochlorthiazide
available as 1.25, 2.5- and 5.0-mg capsules
available as 0.5-, 1.0- and 2.0-mg capsules

Extent of clinical use
ACE inhibitor-containing preparations in 1994 represented a cost to the British
NHS of over 21160 million or 4.15% of the total FHSA medicines expenditure.
Extent of clinical use
ACE inhibitor containing preparations in 1994 represented a cost to the British
NHS of over 21160 million or 4.15% of the total FHSA medicines expenditure.
Therapeutic class and uses
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors block the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin 11. ACE inhibitors are well tolerated and are used widely in
the treatment of hypertension and heart failure.
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are lipophilic prodrug esters
which are converted to active hydrophilic diacid metabolites, e.g. enalapril to
enalaprilat and perindopril to perindoprilat.
The relationship between the dose of ACE inhibitor and the subsequent blood
pressure reduction is complex. ACE inhibitors interact with both circulating and
local renin-angiotensin systems and alter the concentration of the pressor peptide
angiotensin 11. MacFadyen et al. (99) described a qualitative difference between
the blood pressure responses of captopril, enalapril and perindopril in a group
of 72 patients with stable heart failure aged 59-82 years. This patient group is
acknowledged to be at risk from significant hypotensive responses following ACE
inhibitor therapy, which may in part be due to activation of the renin-angiotensin
system. Parallel groups of patients were given placebo 6.25 mg captopril, 2.5 mg
enalapril or 2.0 mg perindopril orally or a constant rate intravenous infusion of
placebo, 1.5 mg enalaprilat or 1.0 mg perindoprilat.

154

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

The maximum recorded fall in mean arterial blood pressure was significantly
greater than placebo (-16 f 7.7 mmHg) for captopril (-22 ? 12) and enalapril
(-26 ? 8) but not perindopril (-15 s 8). Enalapril reduced the heart rate (-11 ? 7
beatdmin) compared to placebo (4-8 hr) and perindopril (20 min to 10 hr). The
different blood pressure responses for perindopril and enalapril were observed with
similar mean maximal ACE inhibition (perindopril, 68 ? 14% ; enalapril,
63 ? 12%). In contrast, the mean maximal fall in mean arterial pressure was similar
for both enalaprilat (-27 & 10 mmHg) and perindoprilat (-24 k 10 mmHg).
Plasma concentrations of ester prodrugs peaked early but persisted during the
study (enalapril, 43 ? 21 ng/ml at 1.95 ? 0.7 hr; perindopril, 38 ? 24 ng/ml at
1.74 S 0.7 hr). This was followed by the appearance of enalaprilat (11.7 ?
5.4 ng/ml) and perindoprilat (4.8 ? 2.5 ng/ml) after desterification, both showing
sustained plateau concentrations.
Earlier in vitro work by Harrigan et al. (100) has suggested that perindopril may
significantly attenuate the inhibition of ACE by perindoprilat in plasma. This does
not appear to be the case for enalapril and enalaprilat. First-dose hypotensive
effects in patients with congestive heart failure could possibly be avoided or reduced
due to this interaction between prodrug and active metabolite.
An increase in the dose of perindopril or continuing therapy would be likely to
overcome this concentration-dependent effect. This interaction between drug and
metabolite could therefore be beneficial.
Food has been shown to reduce the bioavailability of the angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor captopril, but not the bioavailability of inhibitors administered as
ester prodrugs. Perindopril is the ester prodrug of the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor perindoprilat. The influence of food on the pharmacokinetics of
perindopril(4 mg administered orally) and the time course of angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibition in serum was studied in a randomized crossover short-term study
of 12 healthy subjects by Lecocq et al. (101). Food significantly decreased the
relative availability of perindoprilat by 35 f 42%, the fractional urinary excretion
of perindoprilat from 19 2 7 to 13 f 4% ( p < 0.05), and the partial metabolic
clearance of perindopril to perindoprilat from 102 S 57 to 72 ? 32 ml/min
( p < 0.05). These changes were associated with significant decrease in the area
under the percent angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition-versus-time curve by
15% ( p < 0.05). Food did not alter the total amount of drug recovered in urine as
perindopril and its metabolites, and it did not alter perindoprilat renal clearance.
Lecocq et al. concluded that food alters the conversion of perindopril to its active
metabolite perindoprilat after single-dose administration of perindopril.

Side effects
The most common side effect with all ACE inhibitors is persistent dry cough. In a
study on 1013 patients on ACE inhibitors the prevalence of cough was 12.3% and
in the control group it was 2.7% (24). Voice changes, loss of taste and sore mouth
have been reported. Rashes, angioneurotic oedema, hypotension, proteinuria, neu-

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

155

tropenia agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia, renal impairment, increased liver enzyme levels, liver damage, cholestic jaundice and pancreatitis have all been reported. However, other than cough, all reactions are uncommon and ACE inhibitors
are well tolerated. It has been shown (25) that there is an enhanced dose-related
sensitivity to inhaled capsaicin in patients taking ACE inhibitors. It was suggested
that ACE inhibitors may alter the cough reflex in all patients, with those who
develop a cough representing the extreme of this general shift.
Captopril, enalapril, lisinopril, perindopril and ramipril all appear to precipitate
severe angioneurotic oedema in some patients, and appropriate warnings are given
in the data sheets (26, 28, 30-32).

Drug interactions with ACE inhibitors
Combination

Interaction

Alcohol/ACE inhibitor
(11)

Enhanced hypotensive effect

AllopurinollACE
inhibitor (26)

There have been reports of neutropoenia and/or
Stevens-Johnson syndrome in patients receiving
concomitant allopurinol and captopril.

Antipsychotic
agents/ACE inhibitor
(11)

Enhanced hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitors by
chlorpromazine.

P-Adrenergic blocking
drugs/ACE inhibitor
(11, 30)

Enhanced hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitors.

Baclofen/ACE inhibitor
(27)

Enhances the hypotensive effect of ACE inhibitors.

Calcium channel
blocking agents/ACE
inhibitor (11)

Enhanced hypotensive effect.

Carbenoxolone/ACE
inhibitor (29)

Carbenoxolone causes sodium retention and
antagonizes hypotensive action of ACE inhibitors.

156

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Clonidine/ACE inhibitor
(26)

The normal onset of the antihypertensive action of
captopril is delayed when patients treated with
clonidine are changed to captopril.

Corticosteroids/ACE
inhibitor (11)

Antagonism of hypotensive effect of captopril.

Dialysis
membranes/ACE
inhibitor (11)

The Committee on Safety of Medicines in 1992
required all ACE inhibitors to carry a standard
warning that anaphylactoid-like reactions during
haemodialysis with high-flux dialysis membranes, e.g. .
AN69, might occur in patients on ACE inhibitors.

Digoxin/ACE inhibitor
(11)

Plasma concentration of digoxin increased by captopril.
Increased risk of digoxin-related side effects

DiureticdACE inhibitor
(11, 26)

Diuretics potentiate the antihypertensive effect of
captopril. Profound first-dose hypotension may occur
when ACE inhibitors are introduced to patients with
heart failure who are taking a loop diuretic, e.g.
frusemide, Temporary withdrawal of the loop diuretic
reduces the risk but may result in rebound pulmonary
oedema. ACE inhibitors should therefore be started at
low dosage and increased gradually in such patients.
Since captopril reduces aldosterone production
elevation of K+ may occur. Potassium-sparing diuretics
should not be used in conjunction with ACE
inhibitors.

Immunosuppresants/
ACE inhibitor (26)

Azathioprine and cyclophosphamide have been
associated with blood dyscrasias in patients with renal
failure who were also taking captopril.

Indomethacid ACE
inhibitor (11, 26, 30)

A reduction in the antihypertensive effect of captopril
may occur. This effect may also occur with other
NSAIDs.

Levodopa/ACE
inhibitor (11)

Levodopa increases the hypotensive action of
captopril.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

157

Combination

Interaction

Lithium/ACE inhibitor
(11, 26, 30)

Concomitant use of captopril with lithium results in an
increase in serum lithium levels by the same
mechanism as captopril retains sodium. Increased risk
of lithium toxicity.

Oral
contraceptives/ACE
inhibitor (11)

Oestrogens and combined oral contraceptives
antagonize the hypotensive action of ACE inhibitors.

Probenecid/ACE
inhibitor (26)

Probenecid reduces the renal clearance of captopril
and thus enhances the hypotensive effect.

Potassium salts/ACE
inhibitor (11)

Precipitates hyperkalaemia.

Procainamide/ACE
inhibitor (26)

Concomitant use of captopril and procainamide is
alleged to increase the risk of neutropenia and
Stevens-Johnson syndrome.

Vasodilators/ACE
inhibitors (26)

The hypotensive effect of captopril is enhanced when
used in conjunction with peripheral vasodilators, e.g.
minoxidil.

Venom/ACE inhibitors
(28)

Patients receiving ACE inhibitors during
desensitization with hymenoptera (bee or wasp) venom
have experienced life-threatening anaphylactoid
reactions. These reactions have been avoided by
temporarily withholding ACE inhibitor therapy prior
to each desensitization.

3. CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Amlodipine besylate
Diltiazem hydrochloride
FeIodipine
Isradipine
Lacidipine
Nicardipine hydrochloride
Nifedipine
Nimodipine
Verapamil hydrochloride

158

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Calcium channel blockers interfere with the inward movement of calcium (Ca”)
ions through the slow channels of active cell membranes. Calcium channel blockers
influence contractile myocardial cells, cells in the conducting system of the heart,
and the cells of vascular smooth muscle. This means that myocardial contractility
may be reduced, conduction in the AV system depressed, and coronary and systemic
vascular smooth muscle tone reduced leading to vasodilation. Calcium channel
blockers should in general be avoided in patients with heart failure. Calcium channel
blockers differ in their predilection for possible sites of action.
Verapamil reduces cardiac output, slows heart rate, and impairs AV conduction. It
may precipitate heart failure and cause hypotension. Verapamil should not be used
with P-adrenergic blockers.
Diltiazem has a degree of selectivity for dilating the coronary arteries and is used
in the treatment of angina and hypertension. It has lesser propensity to produce a
negative ionotropic effect than verapamil, however use of p-adrenergic blocking
agents in combination with diltiazem is not advised.
The major group of calcium channel blockers the dihydropyridines also show
varying degrees of selectivity.
Nifedipine relaxes vascular smooth muscle in coronary and peripheral arteries, it
has a more pronounced effect on smooth muscle vasculature and less effect on
myocardial contractility than verapamil. It has no effect on AV conduction and thus
has no anti-arrhythmic effects.
Amlodipine and felodipine, are more selective than nifedipine and have no effect
on the myocardial contractility or AV conduction. Nicardipine is intermediate in
terms of its selectivity. These four agents are used in the treatment of angina and
hypertension.
Isradipine and lacidipine are virtually specific for their effects on the smooth muscle
of peripheral arteries and are only used for the treatment of hypertension.
Nimodipine is even more selective in that it acts preferentially on cerebral arteries.
Its main use is to prevent vascular spasm following subarachnoid haemorrhage.

Withdrawal of calcium channel blockers
Sudden withdrawal of calcium channel blockers may precipitate angina or exacerbate angina.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

159

Ethnic difference in nifedipine kinetics
Sowunmi et al. have demonstrated differences in the kinetics of nifedipine for
Nigerian, Asian and Caucasian subjects (32). The area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of nifedipine in Nigerians was significantly higher than for
Caucasians after a single 20-mg oral dose. The elimination half life was also longer
in Nigerians than Caucasians. No significant differences between Nigerians and
South Asians in AUC or half-life of nifedipine were found.

Drug interactions with calcium channel blockers
Combination

Interaction

Anaestheticdcalcium
channel blockers (11)

Verapamil increases the hypotensive effects of general
anaesthetics. Risk of AV block.

Anti-arrhythmics
amiodarone/calcium
channel blockers

There is an increased risk of amiodarone-induced
bradycardia and AV block if amiodarone is used in
combination with diltiazam or verapamil (11).

flecainideherapamil
(11)

There is an increased risk of myocardial depression
and asystole if verapamil is given in combination with
flecainide.

quinidine/verapamil
(11, 35)

Plasma concentration of quinidine increased by
verapamil.

quinidinelnifedipine
(11, 36)

Plasma concentration of quinidine reduced by
nifedipine.

Antibacterials/calcium
channel blockers (11)

Rifampicin increases metabolism of diltiazam,
verapamil, and probably nifedipine and other
dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers.

Anti-epileptic agents/
calcium channel
blockers ( 11)

Diltiazam and nifedipine increase the plasma
concentration of phenytoin.
The effects of felodipine, isradipine, nicardipine and
nifedipine are reduced by carbamazipine,
phenobarbitone, phenytoin and primidone.
Anticonvulsants, such as carbamazepine, phenytoin
and barbiturates, are inducers of cytochrome P450 and
cause marked reductions in felodipine plasma levels.

160

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

combination

Interaction

Anti-epileptic agents/
calcium channel
blockers
Cont.

Patients receiving these drugs will require higher doses
of felodipine.

Antihypertensives/
calcium channel
blockers (11)

There is potentiation of the hypotensive effect of
calcium channel blockers if used in conjunction with
any class of antihypertensive therapy including ACE
inhibitors.

P-Adrenergic
blockers/calcium
channel blockers (11)

P-Adrenergic blockers should not be used with either
diltiazam (risk of bradycardia and AV block),
nifedipine (risk of hypotension and heart failure) or
verapamil (risk of a systole, heart failure and severe
hypotension).
Unlike non-vascular selective calcium channel blockers
there is no additive inhibitory effect on cardiac
contractility and conduction with felodipine.

Cimetidine/calcium
channel blockers
(11, 38, 39)

Cimetidine inhibits the metabolism of some calcium
channel blockers.
Cimetidine is an inhibitor of cytochrome P450 and
causes a moderate increase in felodipine plasma
concentrations.

Cyclosporin/calcium
channel blockers
(35, 37-39)

Plasma cyclosporin levels are increased by diltiazam,
nicardipine and verapamil

Digoxin/calcium channel
blockers
(11, 35-39)

Plasma concentrations of digoxin are increased by
diltiazam, nicardipine and verapamil with increased
risk of AV block and bradycardia.
A small increase in digoxin plasma levels has been
reported with felodipine tablets but not with the
sustained release felodipine formulation.

General
anaesthesia/calcium
channel blockers (39)

Severe hypotension has been reported during fentanyl
anaesthesia with concomitant use of a P-adrenergic
blocker and calcium channel blockers.

Grapefruit juice/calcium
channel blockers (34)

Felodipine, nifedipine, nitrendipine and other
dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers plasma levels
are moderately increased by grapefruit juice which

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

Cornbination

161

Interaction

contains high levels of flavonoids which inhibit
cytochrome P450.

Lithium/calcium
channel blockers (11)

Neurotoxicity may occur without increased plasma
lithium levels in patients also receiving verapamil or
diltiazem.

Skeletal muscle relaxants/
calcium channel blockers
The neuromuscular blocking effect of non-depolarizing
tubocurarine/
verapamil, nifedipine
muscle relaxants such as tubocurarine are potentiated
by verapamil and nifedipine, and possibly other
(11, 35)
calcium channel blockers.

dantrolene/verapamil
(11)

Intravenous dantrolene given to patients on verapamil
has led to hypotension, myocardial depression and
hyperkalaemia.

Theophylline/calcium
channel blockers (38)

Diltiazem caused increases in theophylline blood
levels.

4. ADRENERGIC NEURONE BLOCKING DRUGS
Guanethidine monosulphate
Bethanidine
Debrisoquine

These drugs prevent the release of noradrenaline from post-ganglionic adrenergic
neurones. Guanethidine also depletes the nerve endings of noradrenaline. These
drugs do not control supine blood pressure, and may cause severe postural hypotension. For this reason this subgroup of antihypertensive agents is generally regarded
as obsolete. There may be a residual use for them in resistant hypertension, and
their role in special cases may be a useful one. Guanethidine monosulphate has
found a new therapeutic role in the treatment of glaucoma in an eye drop formulation.

162

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Adrenergic
blockerlother drugs
with hypotensive action
e.g. alcohol (40)
antihypertensives
(41)
diuretics (42, 43)
peripheral
vasodilators (41)
phenothiazines (43)
procainamide (44)
quinidine (45, 46)

These drugs augment the hypertensive effects of
bretylium and guanethidine. Indeed, any drug which
lowers blood pressure, either as a primary or
secondary pharmacological effect , may augment the
action of an antihypertensive drug. The method of
interaction differs from one class of antihypertensive
drug to another and depends largely upon the way in
which the primary antihypertensive drug produces its
own effect. In specific instances the interaction may
have more than one mechanism which can complicate
the ultimate effect, thus, for example, the
phenothiazines are reported to potentiate the
hypotensive effects of guanethidine and are also found
to antagonize the effects of guanethidine by interfering
with its uptake into adrenergic neurones.

Antidepressant
(tricyclic)/debrisoquine
(47-53)

The hypotensive effects of debrisoquine are inhibited
by concomitant administration of amitriptyline,
imipramine , desipramine or protriptyline (47-51). This
interaction is thought to occur primarily at the
sympathetic neurone terminal; it has been suggested
that tricyclic antidepressants inhibit the uptake of
adrenergic neurone-blocking drugs (41, 52, 53).

Fenfluramhe/
debrisoquine (54)

Fenfluramine (Ponderax) antagonizes the hypotensive
action of debrisoquine; although it does not appear to
antagonise the hypotensive effects of methyldopa or
reserpine.

Mazindol/debrisoquine
(55)

Mazindol potentiates the pressor action of
catecholamines.

Phenylephrine/
debrisoquine (56, 57)

Debrisoquine is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor
(MAOI) , and exaggerated blood pressure responses to
oral phenylephrine have been observed in hypertensive
subjects taking debrisoquine (56). This interaction has
been confirmed in clinical pharmacology studies (57).
Mydriasis due to phenylephrine is potentiated.

Tyramine-containing
foodstuff/debrisoquine
(58-60)

Debrisoquine is a MAOI. A hypertensive episode
occurred in a patient receiving debrisoquine (Declinax)
therapy who was given a deliberate tyramine challenge

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

Combination

163

Interaction

in the form of 50 g of Gruybre cheese (58). This was
surprising since debrisoquine has not been found to
inhibit intestinal monoamine oxidase in man (59). The
rapidity of the onset of the interaction (i.e. within 5
min of cheese ingestion) made it most unlikely that the
patient could have absorbed any tyramine from the
small intestine. It has been suggested (60) that
tyramine can be absorbed via the oral mucosa and that
a cheese with a high tyramine content could cause
hypertension even though intestinal monoamine
oxidase was not inhibited. It was likely, however, that
neuronal monoamine oxidase was inhibited.
Antidepressants
(MAOI)/guanethidine
(42)

MAOIs may antagonize the effects of guanethidine
and bethanidine.

Antidepressants
(tricyclics)/
guanethidine
(42, 43, 61-68)

Tricyclic antidepressants may antagonize the effects of
guanethidine, bethanidine, debrisoquine and clonidine
(68). A hypertensive patient was adequately treated
with guanethidine (75 mg/day); because of depression
he was treated with amitriptyline (25 mg tid) and
300 mg of guanethidine were then required for
adequate control. After 5 days of amitriptyline therapy
the effects of guanethidine were again eliminated. The
hypotensive effect of guanethidine did not return until
18 days after amitriptyline therapy was discontinued
(65). The mechanism was thought to be a tricyclic
block of transport of guanethidine into the sympathetic
neurone.

Antidiabetic agent/
guanethidine
e.g. insulin
sulphonylureas
(chlorpropamide,
tolbutamide)
biguanides
(metformin)
(69, 70)

Guanethidine therapy has been associated with a
reduction in insulin requirements in diabetics. A highly
significant improvement in oral glucose tolerance tests
was noted during guanethidine administration in three
patients with maturity onset diabetes.

164

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Drugs interfering with
its uptake into
adrenergic neuronesl
guanethidine
e.g. amphetamines
(43, 64, 66, 67, 71)
diethylpropion (71)
ephedrine (64, 67,
71)
mephentermine
(71)
methylphenidate
(66, 71)
tricyclic
antidepressants
(43, 64, 66, 67)

These drugs antagonize the hypotensive action of
guanethidine by interfering with its uptake into
adrenergic neurones. Larger doses of guanethidine
may be required to produce a hypotensive action.
When one of these agents is withdrawn in an otherwise
stabilized patient a marked hypotensive episode may
occur.

Oral contraceptive/
guanethidine (72)

The antihypertensive effect of guanethidine is reduced.
To treat the hypertension adequately, oral
contraceptives may have to be discontinued.

Phenothiazine
tranquiliserl
guanethidine (41, 43,
67)

Reports conflict as to the nature of this interaction. On
the one hand it has been suggested that phenothiazines
inhibit the uptake of guanethidine into the adrenergic
neurone and thus antagonize its antihypertensive
action; this opinion is based upon a preliminary report
of a chlorpromazine-guanethidine interaction in one
patient (41) and a further report of an adrenergic
neurone blocking drug-chlorpromazine interaction,
again in one patient (67). On the other hand the
phenothiazines are reported to potentiate the effects of
guanethidine and other hypotensive drugs (43).

Sympathomimetic
aminelguanethidine
e .g. amphetamines
(43, 64, 66, 67, 71)
ephedrine (64, 67,
71)

In guanethidine-treated patients the adrenergic
receptor is excessively sensitive to directly acting
sympathomimetic amines and there is an increased
tendency for cardiac arrhythmias. The increased
pressor effect of noradrenaline and phenylephrine in
the presence of guanethidine is well documented. A

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

Combination

noradrenaline (67,
73, 74)
phenylephrine (67,
75, 76)
phenylpropanolamine
(67)

165

Interaction

marked increase in the pupillary response to
phenylephrine eye-drops has been seen in
guanethidine-treated patients. Amphetamines and
ephedrine antagonize the hypotensive
effects of
.guanethidine.

5. CENTRALLY ACTING ANTIHYPERTENSIVE AGENTS

a Clonidine hydrochloride
Clonidine hydrochloride is an anti-hypertensive agent with both central and peripheral sites of action. This dual action sets it apart from other adrenergic neurone
blocking agents. With long-term treatment clonidine reduces the responsiveness of
peripheral vessels to vasoconstrictor and vasodilator substances and to sympathetic
nerve stimulation. Early in treatment blood pressure reduction is associated with a
central reduction of sympathetic outflow and increased vagal tone.
Clinically there may be bradycardia, reduced venous return and reduced cardiac
output. Initially there is no reduction of peripheral resistance, but this tends to fall
as treatment continues.
Sudden withdrawal of clonidine may result in rebound hypertension. Termination
of treatment should therefore be gradual. If an hypertensive episode does ensue
then it should be treated with clonidine or an a-adrenergic blocking agent such as
phentolamine. If clonidine is given concurrently with a P-adrenergic blocking agent
then clonidine should not be discontinued until several days after the withdrawal of
the P-adrenergic blocker (79).
Combination

Antidepressants
(tricyclics)/clonidine
(68, 77-79)

Interaction

Tricyclic antidepressants antagonize the
antihypertensive effect of clonidine.
Introduction of desipramine to clonidine treatment in a
controlled study led to loss of blood pressure control in
four out of five hypertensive patients (68). Previous
studies in animals showed the hypotensive action of
clonidine was reduced about 20-fold by pretreatment
with desipramine (77). An earlier clinical report in one
patient stated that the action of clonidine was impaired
by the introduction of imipramine (78). The
mechanisms involved in this interaction are due to
tricyclics impairing the hypotensive action of clonidine
by an action inhibiting uptake of the clonidine;

166

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antidepressants
(tricyclics)/clonidine
cont.

possibly a central effect due to the a-adrenergic
blocking action of the tricyclics may also be involved.

a-Adrenergic blocking
agentdclonidine (79)

a-Adrenergic blocking agents antagonize the acute
centrally medicated hypotensive action of clonidine.

P-Adrenergic blocking
agentdclonidine (79)

p-Blockers increase the risk of rebound hypertension
on clonidine withdrawal. If clonidine and a padrenergic blocker are given concurrently to control
hypertension, clonidine should not be withdrawn until
several days after the withdrawal of the p-adrenergic
blocker.

b. Methyldopa
Methyldopa exerts a hypotensive effect by interfering with the synthesis and action
of noradrenaline. It inhibits the conversion of dopa to dopamine by competing for
the enzyme dopa decarboxylase and thus reduces the amount of noradrenaline
formed from dopamine. It has also been suggested that the metabolite, a-methylnoradrenaline, which is much less active then noradrenaline, displaces noradrenaline
from its storage sites and acts as a false transmitter.
Methyldopa may induce a positive direct Coombs test in up to 20% of patients
treated. This may affect cross-matching for blood transfusion purposes.
Methyldopa may induce haemolytic anaemia. Other side effects are sedation,
depression, fluid retention, lupus erythematosus-like syndrome, parkinsonism, diarrhoea, rashes of various forms.
Methyldopa is contra-indicated in patients with phaeochromocytoma, Parkinson’s
disease porphyria, active liver disease, history of depression.
Combination

Interaction

Antidepressant (MAOIs
and tricyclic)/
methyldopa (80, 81)

The hypotensive effects of methyldopa may be
diminished by M A 0 1 and tricyclic antidepressants;
hypertension and central excitation may result from
this interaction.

Anti-inflammatory
agents (NSAIDS)/
methyldopa (11)

NSAIDs antagonize hypotensive reaction of
methyldopa

INTERACTIONSWITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

Corn bination

167

Interaction

Calcium channel
blockerdmethyldopa
(81)

Increased hypotensive effect.

Carbenoxolone/
methyldopa (11)

Carbenoxolone antagonizes hypotensive action of
methyldopa.

Corticosteroids/
methyldopa (11)

Corticosteroids antagonize the hypotensive action of
methyldopa.

Levodopa/methyldopa
(82-85)

The interaction between methyldopa and levodopa has
been studied in 18 patients with parkinsonism.
Together the drugs produced a fall in blood pressure in
doses which, when given alone, had no effect or only a
slight hypotensive effect, Severe hypotension never
occurred. The underlying mechanism of the interaction
was thought to be potentiation rather than synergism.
Parkinsonism was unaffected by the administration of
methyldopa during this short-term study, although
there are reports (83-85) of parkinsonism being
induced or worsened by methyldopa.

Lithium/methyldopa
(11, 81, 86, 87)

A patient on lithium carbonate developed signs of
lithium intoxication when methyldopa was introduced
into a previously stable state for the control of
hypertension. Methyldopa is thought to reduce the rate
of renal excretion of lithium. There is a further report
of methyldopa increasing the risk of CNS toxicity (87).
Increased CNS toxicity with lithium/methyldopa
combinations can occur without increased plasma
lithium levels (11).

MazindoVmethyldopa

Mazindol potentiates the pressor action of
catecholamines: hypertensive response.

Oestrogend
methyldopa (11)

Hypotensive action of methyldopa is antagonized by
oral contraceptive agents.

Nitratedmethyldopa
(11)

Enhanced hypotensive effect.

168

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Phenothiazines and
other antipsychotic
agentdmethyldopa
(11, 81)

Increased risk of extrapyramidal effects. The
antihypertensive effect of methyldopa may be
antagonized by phenothiazines.

Phenylpropanolomine/
methyldopa with
oxprenolol (90)

A severe hypertensive episode has been recorded when
phenylpropanolamine in a proprietary cold remedy was
given to a patient receiving antihypertensive treatment
with methyldopa and oxprenolol. (Methyldopa + Padrenergic blocking drugs may produce hypertensive
episodes when given together but there was no
evidence of this interaction occurring in this patient
prior to phenylpropanolamine .)

Propranolol/
methyldopa
(74, 88, 89)

The combination of methyldopa and intravenous
propranolol has been reported occasionally to produce
severe hypertension (88).
Methyldopa is known to increase the pressor effects of
sympathomimetic amines (74), and it has been
postulated that P-blockade may have a similar action
by allowing an unopposed a-constrictor response to
adrenergic stimulation (89).

Sympathomimetic
amine/methyldopa
(11, 74)

The hypotensive effects of methyldopa may be
diminished by amphetamine and other
sympathomimetic drugs. Methyldopa is also known to
increase the pressor effects of sympathomimetic
amines.

a-Adrenergic blocking agents
Doxazosin
Indoramin
Phenoxybenzamine hydrochloride
Phentolamine
Prazosin hydrochloride
Terazosin
Prazosin has a post-synaptic a-blocking localised vascular smooth muscle action and
consequent vasodilator properties, it rarely causes tachycardia. Prazosin may cause
a precipitous reduction in blood pressure after the first dose. Treatment should be
initiated with caution at a low dose and increased gradually. Doxazosin and terazosin

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

169

have similar properties. Phenoxybenzamine and indoramin also act selectively and
competitively on post-synaptic a1 receptors. Phenoxybenzamine is used with a pblocker in the acute management of severe hypertensive episodes such as those
associated with phaeochromocytoma or in drug-induced hypertensive crises. Phentolamine’s use is confined exclusively to the treatment of drug-induced hypertensive
crises.
A few cases of extrapyramidal disorders have been reported with indoramin (91).
Caution in prescribing to patients with Parkinson’s disease is recommended.
Combination

Interaction

Antihypertensive
agents/prazosin (91)

Potentiation of the hypotension action of a-adrenergic
blocking drugs is achieved by the combination with any
other hypotensive agent, Potentiation is most marked
with p-adrenergic blocking agents.

Chlorpromazine plus
amitriptyline/prazosin
(92)

A patient who was taking chlorpromazine and
amitriptyline showed acute agitation on taking
prazosin. The symptoms settled rapidly when prazosin
was stopped.

Glyceryl
trinitrate/prazosin (93)

The hypotensive effect of prazosin was prolonged
when glyceryl trinitrate was given concurrently.

Indomethacid
prazosin (94)

Prazosin-induced hypotension was reduced by
indomethacin in four of nine subjects.

Tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitors
Metirosine inhibits the enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase and hence the synthesis of
catecholamines. It is used in the pre-operative treatment of phaeochromocytoma,
it is also used long term in patients with phaeochromocytoma who are unsuitable
for surgery. In such patients it should be used in conjunction with an a-adrenergic
blocking drug such as phenoxybenzamine. (95)
Metirosine is not suitable for the treatment of essential hypertension.
The most common adverse reaction with metirosine is severe sedation. Sedation
is maximal after 2-3 days treatment and then tends to diminish and is not a problem
after 7-10 days. Patients should be warned about the risk of sedation and advised
not to drive or operate machinery. Metirosine sedation is enhanced by alcohol and
other CNS depressants, e.g. hypnotics sedatives, tranquillisers and anxiolytics.
Extrapyramidal signs such as drooling, speech difficulties and tremor occur in
about 10% of patients. The extrapyramidal side effects of phenothiazines and
haloperidol are potentiated. Diarrhoea, breast swelling and galactorrhoea have also
been reported, as have nasal stuffiness, headache, impotence and ejaculation failure.

170

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Ganglion-blocking agents
Trimetaphan camsylate is a short acting ganglion-blocking agent which also has a
direct vasodilator effect on peripheral vessels. It has a rapid short and reversible
action which permits minute-to-minute control of blood pressure. Trimetaphan is
therefore used to induce controlled hypotension during surgical procedures, e.g.
neurosurgery, vascular surgery, prostatectomy, thyroidectomy, etc. (96).
Trimetaphan may sensitise the patient to the cardiovascular effects of both endogenous and exogenous sympathomimetic amines.
Ganglion blockade due to trimetaphan may reduce gastrointestinal mobility,
cause urinary retention, impair visual accommodation, raise intraocular pressure
and may, on occasion, induce hypoglycaemia and hypokalaemia.
Ganglion blockers as a group were first line treatment for control of hypertension
in the 1960s, but agents such as hexamethonium bromide, mecamylamine hydrochloride, pempidine tartrate, and pentolinium tartrate are now generally regarded
as obsolete.

Combination

Interaction

Skeletal muscle
relaxantdtrimetaphan
(96))

Care should be taken using trimetaphan with
suxamethonium.

Sympathomimetic
aminedtrimetaphan
(96))

Trimetaphan may sensitise the patient to the
cardiovascular effects of sympathomimetic amines.

Vasodilator antihypertensive drugs
This group consists of potent drugs, especially so when used in conjunction with a
P-adrenergic blocking agent and a diuretic. These agents should be used to control
hyptertensive crises or malignant hypertension resistant to other treatment.
Diazoxide administered by mouth is useful in the management of patients with
chronic hypoglycaemia from excess endogenous insulin secretion, either from an
islet cell tumour or islet cell hyperplasia. Retention of sodium and water are
common. Extrapyramidal side effects, cardiomegaly, leucopenia and thrombocytopenia have occurred. Diazoxide is also given by rapid intravenous injection for the
control of severe renal hypertension. Side effects include tachycardia, hyperglycaemia, and sodium and water retention. Other adverse reactions that have been
reported are hyperosmolar non-ketotic coma, cardiomegaly, leucopenia, thrombocytopenia and hirsutism.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

171

Drug interactions with diazoxide
Combination

Interaction

Anticoagulants/diazoxide Anticoagulation potentiated.
(97)
Diuretics/diazoxide (97)

Diuretic effects potentiated.

Antihypertensive
agentddiazoxide (97)

Hypotensive effects potentiated.

Hydralazine is a direct vasodilator which exerts its principal effect on the arterioles.
Its precise mode of action is unknown. In clinical use to control severe or resistant
hypertension it produces a fall in peripheral resistance and a decrease in arterial
blood pressure, which in turn induces reflex compensatory responses via the sympathetic system and by salt and fluid retention with oedema and reduced urinary
volume. It is therefore generally used in combination with a p-adrenergic blocking
agent and a diuretic to reduce these compensatory reflex responses.
The ‘overall’ hyperdynamic state of the cardiovascular system in its reflex responses to the profound vasodilation may by myocardial stimulation provoke or
aggravate angina. Patients with coronary artery disease should therefore only be
given hydralazine with a P-adrenergic blocker. Long-term treatment with hydralazine may provoke a lupus erythematosus-like syndrome, the first symptoms of which
are likely to be arthralgia, fever, and rash. In its more severe form it resembles
acute SLE, and renal and ocular involvement may occur. Long-term treatment with
corticosteroids may be necessary to control these LE like effects. Slow acetylators
and women are most likely to develop LE syndrome.
Rare side effects include blood dyscrasias; abnormal liver function tests, jaundice
and hepatitis; proteinuria; arthralgia and myalgia, paralytic ileus (97).

Drug interactions with hydralazine
Combination

Interaction

Alcohol/hydralazine
(11, 18)

Enhanced hypotensive effect.

Aldesleukin/
hydralazine (11)

Enhanced hypotensive effect.

172

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Anaesthetics/
hydralazine (11)

Enhanced hypotensive effect.

Antidepressants1
hydralazine (11, 98)

Tricyclic antidepressants and major tranquillisers
enhance the hypotensive effect. Caution should be
particularly exerted with concurrent use of MAOIs.

Antihypertensive
agents/hydralazine
(11, 98)

ACE inhibitors, P-adrenergic blockers, calcium
antagonists and diuretics all potentiate the hypotensive
effect of hydralazine.

Corticosteroids/
hydralazine (11)

Corticosteroids antagonize the hypotensive effect of
hydralazine .

Levodopa/hydralazine

Levodopa potentiates hydralazine.

Muscle relaxants/
hydralazine (11)

Baclofen potentiates the hypotensive effects.

NSAIDdhydralazine
(11)

NSAIDs antagonize the hypotensive action of
hydralazine.

Sex hormones/
hydralazine (11)

Oestrogens (HRT) and combined oral contraceptive
preparations antagonize the hypotensive effect of
hydralazine .

Sodium nitroprusside is given by intravenous infusion to control severe hypertensive
crises. The action is directly on vascular musculature and is achieved independently
of the autonomic nervous system. Duration of effect is brief due to the rapid
conversion to cyanide and then thiocyanate. This permits minute by minute control
of the haemodynamic effects.
The precautions as to the use of sodium nitroprusside are similar to those of
hydralazine, with the additional precaution of use in patients with hypothyroidism
because thiocyanate inhibits both the re-uptake and binding of iodine by the thyroid.
If overdosage occurs, the symptoms being that of cyanide poisoning, stop the
nitroprusside infusion. Thiosulphate or dicobalt edetate, or hydroxycobalamin
should be administered as an antidote; ancilliary oxygen therapy should also be
given.
Drug interactions for sodium nitroprusside: interactions are as for hydralazine.
Minoxidil exerts its hypotensive action by action on the smooth muscle vasculature.
Minoxidil is contraindicated in patients with phaecochromocytoma. Like diazoxide
and hydralazine it is normally given with a diuretic and P-adrenergic blocker since

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

173

vasodilation is accompanied by reflex cardiac output and fluid retention. Soon after
starting minoxidil, 60% of patients exhibit ECG changes, these changes disappear
with continuing treatment. Pericardial effusions have been detected in some patients, but a cause and effect relationship has not been established. Minoxidil has
also been found to stimulate hair growth and is used topically for this purpose.
Drug interactions for minoxidil: interactions are as for hydralazint .

REFERENCES

1 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
2047-49 (propranol).
2 Robson RH, Vishwanath MC. (1982) Br Med J 284, 104.
3 Anastassiades CJ. (1980) Br Med J 281, 1251.
4 Opie LH, White DA. (1980) Br Med J 281, 1462.
5 Staffurth JS, Emery P. (1981) Br Med J 282, 225.
6 Joshi PI et al. (1981) Br Heart J 45, 457.
7 Martindale Reynolds JEF, (ed) (1982) The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 28th ed, London,
Pharmaceutical Press, pp. 1329-30.
8 Watt DAL. (1968) Br Med J 3 , 413.
9 Bonde J et al. (1985) Eur J Clin Pharmacol28, 41-3.
10 Ochs H R et al. (1980) N Engl J Med 303, 373.
11 British National Formulary. (March 1996) No. 31, Appendix 1.
12 Weidler DJ et al. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 29, 289.
13 Rennett PN et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 13, 387.
14 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
542-3 ( ~ o t ~ l o l ) .
15 Thomsas M et al. (1996)) Br J Clin Pharmacol41, 77-81.
16 Barrett AM, Cullum VA. (1968) J Pharm Pharmacol 20, 911.
17 Feely J et al. (1981) Eur J Clin Pharmacol 19, 329.
18 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1726-28 (cimetidine).
19 Kolendorf K et al. (1982) Acta Med Scand 211, 175.
20 Zaman R et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 13, 507.
21 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1745-46 (fluvoxamine).
22 Kotler MN et al. (1966) Lancet 2 , 1389.
23 Abramson EA, Arky RA. (1968) Diabetes 17, 141.
24 Wood R. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 265-270.
25 Yeo WW et al. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 271-276.
26 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1767-69 (captopril).
27 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
376-8 (baclofen).
28 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1010-12 (enalapril).
29 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1589-90 (carbenoxolone),
30 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
2090 (lisinopril).
31 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
696-98 (ramipril).

174

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

32 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1693-4 ( perindopril).
33 Sowunmi A et al. (1995) Brit J Clin Pharmacol40, 489-493.
34 Bailey D G et al. (1995) Brit J Clin Pharmacol40, 135-139.
35 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
167-9 (verapamil).
36 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
182-4 (nifedipine).
37 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1530-33 (cyclosporin).
38 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
909-910 (dilitazem).
39 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1817-19 (nicardipine).
40 Hughes FW et al. (1965) Clin Pharmacol Ther 6, 139.
41 Hansten PD. (1975) Drug Interactions, 3rd ed, Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, p. 15.
42 Martindale Reynolds JEF (ed) (1982) The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 28th ed, London,
Pharmaceutical Press, p. 146.
43 Drug Ther Bull. (1967) 5, 89-92.
44 Hansten PD (1975) Drug Interactions, 3rd ed, Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, p. 10.
45 Hansten PD (1975) Drug Interactions, 3rd ed, Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, p. 19.
46 Packman RC (ed) (1966) Manual of Medical Therapeutics, 18th ed, Boston, Little,
Brown & Co., p. 144.
47 Mitchell JR et al. (1970) J Clin Invest 49, 1596.
48 Rosendorff C et al. (1968) Arch Intern Med 122, 487.
49 Skinner C et al. (1969) Lancet ii, 564.
50 Mitchell JR, Oakes AJ. (1970) J Pharmacol Exp Ther 172, 100.
51 Mitchell JR et al. (1970) J Pharmacol Exp Ther 172, 108.
52 Pettinger WA et al. (1968) Clin Res 16, 224.
53 Pettinger WA et al. (1968) J Newark City Hosp 5, 8.
54 Waal-Manning HJ, Simpson FO. (1969) Lancet ii, 1392.
55 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium, (1986-87) (1986) London, Data Pharm Publications
Ltd, pp. 1371-2.
56 Aminu J et al. (1970) Lancet ii, 935.
57 Allum W et al. (1974) Br J Clin Pharmacol 1, 51.
58 Amery A , Deloof W. (1970) Lancet ii, 613.
59 Pettinger WA et al. (1969) Clin Pharmacol Ther 10, 667.
60 Price K, Smith SE. (1971) Lancet i , 130.
61 Leishman ADW et al. (1963) Lancet i, 112.
62 Hills NF. (1965) Br Med J 1, 859.
63 White AG. (1965) Lancet ii, 441.
64 Gulati OD et al. (1966) Clin Pharmacol Ther 7, 510.
65 Mitchell JR et al. (1967) JAMA 202, 973.
66 Feagin OT et al. (1969) J Clin Invest 48, 23a.
67 Starr KJ, Petrie JC. (1972) Br Med J 4, 133.
68 Briant RH et al. (1973) Br Med J 1, 522.
69 Gupta KK, Lillicrap CA. (1968) Br Med 2, 697.
70 Gupta KK. (1968) Br Med J 3, 679.
71 Day MD, Rand MJ. (1962) Lancet ii, 1282.
72 Oral Contraceptives (1974) Bulletin, Vol. 5, No. 3, Health Protection Branch Department of Health and Welfare, Canada.
73 Muelheims GH et al. (1965) Clin Pharmacol Ther 6, 757.
74 Dollery CT. (1965) Proc R SOC Med 58, 983.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED TO TREAT HYPERTENSION

175

75 Sneddon JM, Turner P. (1969) Arch Ophthalmol81, 622.
76 Cooper B. (1968) Med J Aust 2, 240.
77 Briant RH, Reid JL. (1972) Br J Pharmacol46, 563 pp.
78 Conolly ME et al. (1969) In: Catapres in Hypertension, London, Buttenvorths, p. 167.
79 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1986-87) (1986) London, Data Pharm Publications
Ltd, pp. 236-7 (clonidine).
80 Evaluations of Drug Interactions (1973) 1st ed, Washington, Am Pharm Assoc, p. 258.
81 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1986-87) (1986) London, Data Pharm Publications
Ltd, pp. 980-2 (methyldopa).
82 Gibberd FB, Small E. (1973) Br Med J 2, 90.
83 Groden BM. (1963) Br Med J 1, 1001.
84 Peaston MJT. (1964) Br Med J 2, 168.
85 Vaidya RA et al. (1970) Metabolism 19, 1069.
86 O’Regan JB. (1976) Can Med Assoc J 115, 385.
87 Osanloo E, Deglin JH. (1980) Ann Intern Med 92, 434.
88 Mies SA, Shand DG. (1972) Clin Pharmacol Ther 14, 823.
89 Blum I et al. (1975) Br Med J 4, 623.
90 McLaren EH. (1976) Br Med J 3, 283.
91 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1034-5 (indoramin).
92 Bolli P, Simpson FO. (1974) Br Med 1, 637.
93 Raftos J. (1976) Drugs 11, 55.
94 Rubin P et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol 10, 33.
95 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1002-3 (metirosine).
96 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
337 (trimetaphan camsylate)
97 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
550 (diazoxide).
98 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1879-80 (minoxidil).
99 MacFadyen RJ. (1991) J Hypertension 9 (suppl 6), 5376.
100 Harrigan JR et al. (1989) Eur J Clin Pharmacol36 (suppl l), A186.
101 Lecocq B et al. (1990) Clin Pharmacol Ther 47, 397.
I

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

2.3. DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH
ANTICOAGULANTS AND
FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS
1. ORAL ANTICOAGULANTS (INDIRECT ANTICOAGULANTS)

i. Coumarin Derivatives
Dicoumarol (Dicoumarin, Bishydroxycoumarol USP)
Ethyl biscoumacetate
Nicoumalone
Phenprocoumon
Warfarin sodium
ii. Indanedione Derivatives
Anisindione
Diphenadione
Phenindione
The coumarins and indanediones are synthetic compounds which are effective after
oral dosage. Unlike heparin they have no effect on clotting if added to whole blood
in vitro. They act indirectly, that is they must be absorbed and metabolized by the
body before they produce an effect. It is known that they interfere with the hepatic
formation of prothrombin and at least three other factors concerned in blood
clotting. The anticoagulant action of both these groups of drugs is similar; they
differ only in the intensity and duration of action of a given dose. With all these
agents, there is a delay of at least 12 hr before any effect is observed; this delay is
not due to slow absorption but is a reflection of the necessity for this type of drug
to be metabolized before it exerts its effect. These indirect anticoagulants can be
antagonized by phytomenadione (vitamin K,) which can be given orally, intramuscularly or intravenously.
Contraindications for use of the oral anticoagulants are as for the use of heparin;
apart from haemorrhage other toxic effects are uncommon. The coumarins occasionally cause skin rashes and alopecia but have not been responsible for any major
toxic effects other than areas of tissue necrosis; although rare, cases have been
reported in France, Germany, The Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, USA and
the United Kingdom (these areas of necrosis affect buttocks, breasts, thighs and in

177

178

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

most cases have appeared within a few days of commencing therapy and most cases
have appeared in obese women). The problem of anticoagulant skin necrosis has
been reviewed by Jones and Staffa (1) and by Griffin (2). On the other hand,
phenindione has been occasionally incriminated in serious and occasionally fatal
toxic reactions, particularly exfoliative dermatitis, hepatic and renal damage, and
blood dyscrasias.

SUMMARY: ONSET AND DURATION OF ACTIVITY OF THE ORAL
ANTICOAGULANTS
Short-acting
Ethyl biscoumacetate Stable anticoagulation is hard to achieve even if the drug is
given 6-hourly and the prothrombin time must be estimated every other day while
it is being given. Maximum therapeutic effect occurs within 18-30 hr; the prothrombin time usually returns to normal within 48 hr of administration of the last dose.

Intermediate-acting
Phenindione Phenindione was popular until it became known that it can cause
serious and occasionally fatal toxic reactions. A therapeutic effect is evident within
24-30 hr, and full effect within 36-48 hr. The anticoagulant effect usually ceases
within 30 hr of stopping therapy.
Nicoumalone Maximum therapeutic effect occurs within 36-48 hr; the prothrombin
time usually returns to normal within 48-72 hr of administration of the last dose.

Long-acting
Anisindione Maximum therapeutic effect occurs within 34 hours; prothrombin depression may persist for up to 3 days after cessation of therapy.
Dicoumarol The original coumarin anticoagulant, dicoumarol, is now little used;
it is absorbed slowly and erratically. Development of therapeutic effect takes from
24 to 72 hr; the effect may persist for 96 hr or more after dosage is stopped.
Warfarin sodium This is the most commonly prescribed coumarin derivative; it is
equally effective orally or intravenously, and may also be given intramuscularly;
development of therapeutic effect takes from 12 to 18 hr and may persist for 5-6
days.
Phenprocoumon Maximum therapeutic effect occurs within 24-48 hr; it takes 714 days for the prothrombin time to return to normal after the last dose. More

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

179

Table 1. LEVEL 1 INTERACTIONS WITH WARFARIN
Therapeutic group

Potentiation

Inhibition

Antibiotics and antimicrobials

co-trimoxazole
erythromycin
fluconazole
isoniazid
metronidazole
miconazole

griseofulvin
nafcillin
rifampicin

Cardiac

amiodarone
clofibrate
propafenone
propranolol
sulphinp yrazone

cholestyramine

Anti-inflammatory

phenylbutazone
piroxicam

-

CNS

alcohol

barbiturates
carbamazepine
chlordiazepoxide

Gastro intestinal

cimetidine
omeprazole

sucralfate

Miscellaneous

-

high vitamin K content foods,
large amounts of avocado

than one dose of vitamin K1 may be needed if reversal of effect is required during
treatment.

Very long-acting
Diphenadione Maximum therapeutic effect occurs within 48-72 hr; prothrombin
depression may persist for as long as 20 days after dosage ceases.
In a detailed literature review of reported warfarin interactions citations, 793 were
retrieved and examined by Wells et al. (3) who scored the level of probability of
such drug interactions with warfarin as:
level 1, highly probable; level 2, probable; level 3, possible; level 4, doubtful that
a clinically important interaction had or had not occurred. These assessments for
level 1 interactions are summarized in Table 1.

2. INTRAVENOUSLY ADMINISTERED AGENTS
i. Alteplase (TPA) (Actilyse)
Alteplase is a tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) produced by recombinant technology. Alteplase is a glycoprotein which activates the conversion of plasminogen to
plasmin. When administered intravenously alteplase remains inactive in the circu-

180

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

lation until it binds to fibrin, for which it has a high affinity. Activation of alteplase
by fibrin causes a local conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, thus inducing thrombolysis of the clot. After intravenous injection alteplase is cleared rapidly from the
circulation by liver catabolisms, the tl,* being of the order of 5 min.
Alteplase and anistreplase should not be used in patients: (i) with a history of
cerebrovascular disease with uncontrolled hypertension in view of the risk of cerebral haemorrhage; (ii) with known bleeding diathesis; (iii) within 10 days of major
trauma or surgery; (iv) with active peptic ulceration; (v) with acute pancreatitis;
(vi) with bacterial endocarditis; (vii) with severe liver disease, with or without portal
hypertension, with oesophageal varices; (viii) with proliferative diabetic retinopathy.
Alteplase does not cross the placental barrier. Allergic reactions, anaphylaxis and
Guillain-Barre syndrome have rarely been reported with these therapies.
Pharmacokinetic interactions with alteplase are largely expected on theoretical
grounds to be confined to interactions that alter the hepatic blood flow (HBF) and
therefore the hepatic clearance of alteplase (4).
In de Boer and van Griensven’s review of this area they point out that
In animal experiments, changes in the pharmacokinetics of alteplase have been demonstrated with compounds that alter HBF. Sodium nitroprusside increased plasma concentrations of alteplase in rabbits and epoprostenol (prostacyclin) produced an increase in CL
of alteplase by 30% to 40% in dogs. This corresponded with the numerous human
and animal studies in which it was demonstrated that nitrovasodilators decrease and
epoprostenol increases HBF.
The routine administration of heparin, aspirin, P-blockers and nitrates concurrently
with alteplase is recommended. Furthermore, treatment of chest pain by opioids, of
cardiac rhythm disturbances by antiarrhythmics and of cardiogenic forward failure by
inotropic agents may be indicated during alteplase administration.
As mentioned above heparin does not influence the pharmacokinetics of alteplase.
Similarly, such an interaction is not expected between aspirin and alteplase. Acute administration of nitrates and P-blockers produce a decrease in H B F and calcium antagonists
produce an increase, Therefore, these compounds are expected to influence the plasma
concentration of alteplase.

Lignocaine, atropine, dopamine and morphine in normal therapeutic doses do not
alter hepatic blood flow in man and therefore on theoretical grounds should not
cause clinical problems.
ii. Ancrod (Venom of Malayan pit-viper) (Arvin)
Anticoagulation is produced by controlled defibrination. Ancrod acts enzymically
on the fibrin molecule to form a product which cannot be clotted by physiological
thrombin. Ancrod cleaves fibrinogen to split off A-fibropeptides (A, AY, AP), but
not fibropeptide B, to produce a friable, unstable, urea-soluble, non-cross-linked
particulate fibrin particle, 1-2 p,m long, This fibrin has degraded a-chains, is rapidly
digested by plasmin and is rapidly removed by phagocytosis in the reticulo-endothelial system or by fibrinolysis. Overdose with ancrod should be treated with the
specific antidote of anti-venom serum.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

181

iii. Anistreplase (Eminase)
Anistreplase is a streptokinase-plasminogen complex with an anisoyl group reversibly placed within the catalytic centre of the plasminogen moiety ( 5 ) . In common
with streptokinase, anistreplase is inactive on injection, and activation occurs in a
controlled fashion by hydrolysis of the anisoyl group directly after its administration.
After its activation anistreplase largely behaves similarly to streptokinase. It is
metabolized in the liver, its tIl2is of the order of 60-90 min.
iv. Epoprostenol
Epoprostenol is a prostacyclin, it is given to inhibit platelet aggregation during
cardiopulmonary bypass and charcoal haemoperfusion, and as an alternative to
heparin in renal dialysis. since its half-life is only about 3 min it must be given by
continuous intravenous infusion. It is a potent vasodilator and therefore its side
effects include flushing, headache and hypotension.
Epoprostenol should not be administered to pregnant women and there is no
information on its effects on lactation since, like other prostaglandins, it has an
action on smooth muscle and can induce uterine contractions.

v. Heparin BP (Heparin Sodium, Soluble Heparin, Sodium Heparin USP)
Heparin is a sterile preparation containing the sodium salt of a complex organic
acid present in mammalian tissues; it is isolated from beef lung or other mammalian
sources and has the characteristic property of preventing clotting of blood. It
produces its anticoagulant effect by inhibiting the conversion of prothrombin to
thrombin and also inhibiting the thrombin conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin. This
anticoagulant action can be neutralized by protamine sulphate (Protamine Sulphate
Injection BP, Protamine Sulphate for Injection USP).
Heparin is poorly absorbed by mouth; after intravenous or intramuscular injection
it is extensively bound to plasma proteins; it is inactivated in the liver and is found
in the urine largely as uroheparin, a degraded form of heparin. Heparin does not
cross the placenta and does not appear in breast milk (6).
As with other anticoagulants the main danger of therapy with heparin is haemorrhage. Heparin therapy should be instituted with extreme caution in patients with
a known pre-existing tendency to bleed, in subacute bacterial endocarditis, gastric
or duodenal ulcer, haemophilia, malignant disease, advanced renal or liver disease
and pregnancy. Menstruation is not a contraindication to the use of heparin.
If heparin is to be administered by adding it to an intravenous infusion fluid,
then care must be given to the choice of infusion fluid otherwise the heparin will
be rapidly inactivated.
Prolonged heparin therapy causes osteoporosis and increased urinary calcium
loss. Low molecular weight or fractionated heparin in various formulations are
available and are usually given once daily by subcutaneous injection for the prevention of venous thromboembolism. They have a longer duration of action than
unfractionated heparin.

182

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

vi. Urokinase
Urokinase is a 2 (ukidan)-chain serine protease which, like streptokinase, lacks
fibrin specificity. It directly activates plasminogen without forming a complex. It is
subject to hepatic inactivation and has a tlI2 of 15-20 min.

vii. Saruplase (Pro Urokinase)
The unglycosylated human single-chain urokinase plasminogen activator is a
relatively fibrin-specific thrombolytic agent. A proportion of saruplase is converted
to urokinase in vivo. The exact mechanism by which saruplase exerts its action is
unknown, but some of its activity must be due to its conversion to urokinase.

viii. Streptokinase (kabikinase, streptase)
Streptokinase is a single-chain non-fibrin-specific thrombolytic agent. Usually 1.5
million U are given as a continuous intravenous infusion over 1hr. Following its
administration, streptokinase is activated after formation of a complex with circulating plasminogen (7). This complex converts noncomplexed plasminogen to plasmin
irrespective of whether it is bound or unbound fibrin (clot). Streptokinase is cleared
from plasma largely by the liver. The half-life ( t l l z )is of the order of 30-60 min.
Rapid infusion of streptokinase can lead to a substantial reduction in blood
pressure, probably by excessive activation of the kallikrein-kinin system. Petch (8)
has reviewed the dangers of thrombolysis.
Thrombolytic therapy with streptokinase during the first 18 weeks of pregnancy
should be avoided, since there is an increase risk of placental separation. Negligible
amounts of streptokinase cross the placenta, foetal blood concentrations being less
than 1/1000 the maternal blood levels.

3. DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH COUMARIN ANTICOAGULANTS
Combination

Interaction

Anticoagulant/alcohol
(9, 10)

Acute alcohol intake even in moderate amounts
potentiates the action of coumarin anticoagulants by
inhibition of their hepatic enzyme metabolism. In
alcoholics the half-life of warfarin is reduced due to
alcohol-induced stimulation (induction) of liver
microsomal enzymes.

Anticoagulant/
allopurinol (11- 14)

Allopurinol potentiates the anticoagulant action of
warfarin. It is thought that the interaction is due to
inhibition of warfarin metabolism (13). Allopurinol has

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Combination

183

Interaction

been shown to increase the plasma half-life of
bishydroxycoumarin.
Coumarin
anticoagulant/
amiodarone

Five of nine patients given amiodarone while on
established warfarin treatment presented with bleeding
phenomena 3-4 weeks later; warfarin dosage required
reduction by 30% to re-establish anticoagulant control;
these warfarin-potentiating effects persisted up to 4
months after amiodarone was stopped (15). In one
patient (16) the addition of amiodarone on two
occasions led to dangerous increases in the
anticoagulant effects of warfarin in one patient (16).
Animal studies (16) and other case reports have
confirmed this interaction (17). Its mechanism has not
yet been established but it may be due to displacement
of warfarin from protein binding sites or, alternatively,
to altered warfarin metabolism.

Anticoagulant1
anabolic steroid
(11, 18-21)
e.g.
drostanolone
ethyloestrenol
methandienone
methandriol
me thenolone
nandrolone
nore thandrolone
oxandrolone
oxymesterone
oxymetholone
stanozolol

A number of patients receiving oral anticoagulants and
anabolic steroids have developed haemorrhages. This
interaction is thought to be due to reduced clotting
factor synthesis. In addition, anabolic steroids are
thought to potentiate the anticoagulant action of
coumarins by increased receptor site affinity.

Anticoagulant/
anti-inflammatory
analgesic drugs aspirin
and other salicylates
(9, 18, 20)

These displace coumarins from plasma protein-binding
sites and thereby potentiate their anticoagulant action.
Salicylates also tend to reduce plasma prothrombin
levels. Aspirin has an ulcerogenic action and also gives
rise to occult bleeding from superficial gastric erosions.
Haemorrhage is made worse if these drugs are used in
combination.
Aspirin should be avoided completely by patients on

184

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anticoagulant1
anti-inflammatory
analgesic drugs cont.

oral anticoagulant treatment. There is some evidence
to suggest that sodium salicylate is less likely to
produce gastrointestinal bleeding; however, all
salicylates should be used with caution in such
patients.

azapropazone
(22, 23)

This compound, which is structurally related to
phenylbutazone, displaces warfarin from plasmaprotein binding sites and thus potentiates its
anticoagulant action. The mechanism of this
interaction may also depend on the effect of
azapropazone on the renal clearance of the R and S
isomers of warfarin.

diflunisal (24)

Addition of diflunisal to warfarin regimes in five
normal subjects did not alter clotting tests, but total
warfarin concentration in serum decreased from 0.74
to 0.63 p,g/ml. Increase in unbound warfarin level
(1.024-1.337%) was directly related to plasma
diflunisal concentration. Warfarin level took 12 days to
return to 0.71 pg/ml when diflunisal was stopped. The
clinical significance of this interaction has yet to be
established.

dextropropoxyphene
and paracetamol (25)

Two patients developed gross haematuria when
Distalgesic was given during the course of warfarin
anticoagulant therapy. It is thought that the interaction
is due to inhibition of warfarin metabolism by
dextropropoxyphene. In one of the above patients the
plasma warfarin level increased from 5.9 to 7.8 p,mol/l
despite reduction in dosage.
A reduction in warfarin dosage in anticipation of this
reaction is recommended if dextropropoxyphene is
given concomitantly.

flurbiprofen (26)

Two patients, both stabilized for several years on
acenocoumarol (13-41 mg/week) , developed
haematomas and haematuria or melaena 2-3 days after
flurbiprofen (150-300 mg/day). In one case, the
Thrombotest time increased from 158 sec before
flurbiprofen to 13.5 min after; in the second case the
increase was from 127 to 200 sec. Discontinuation of

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Combination

185

Interaction

flurbiprofen and acenocoumarol and initiation of i.v.
phytomenadione led to recovery within 3.5-6 weeks
and both patients resumed acenocoumarol without
adverse effects. Avoid this combination.
indomethacin
(18, 27-30)

Peptic ulceration, possibly with gastrointestinal
haemorrhage, may occur with indomethacin therapy,
and could become severe if an anticoagulant drug is
given concomitantly. It has also been suggested that
indomethacin may displace coumarins from plasma
protein binding sites thus resulting in an enhancement
of their anticoagulant action (28).
Avoid this combination if possible; if drugs have to be
given together, use with caution since ulcerogenic
action of indomethacin may complicate the interaction.
Substitution of ibuprofen for indomethacin in one case
re-established anticoagulant control (30).

ketoprofen (31)
naproxen (31)

These two drugs for the treatment of various forms of
arthropathy are rapidly absorbed after oral
administration. They become bound to plasma protein
and may displace other drugs that compete for the
same binding sites, thereby increasing their activity,
and particular care is necessary with anticoagulants.
Neither drug seems to induce microsomal enzymes in
the liver.

mefenamic acid
(18, 20, 31)

It has been reported that mefenamic acid may enhance
the effects of coumarin anticoagulants (32), possibly by
displacement from plasma protein binding sites (31).
Although said to be less likely to produce
gastrointestinal haemorrhage than aspirin, its use in
conjunction with anticoagulants requires caution.

paracetamol
(acetaminophen)
(9, 33-36)

Reports on a paracetamol-coumarin interaction are
controversial; indeed there are doubts as to whether
such an interaction occurs (9, 33) or, if it does,
whether it is of clinical significance (34). However,
paracetamol has been tabulated among drugs which
are capable of potentiating oral anticoagulants,
although such entry is qualified by relating it to high
dosage for several weeks (35). Interest has been raised

186

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anticoagulant1
anti-inflammatory
analgesic drugs cant.

again by a new report on 20 patients which indicates
that such interaction does occur and that it is of
sufficient clinical importance to require reduction in
anticoagulant dosage in some patinets. It was
suggested that the interaction might be related to
interference with hepatic synthesis of factors 11, VII,
IX and X (36).

phenylbutazone
(9, 18, 20, 37)
oxyphenbutazone
(18, 20)

These related drugs both displace coumarins from
plasma protein binding sites and thus potentiate their
anticoagulant effects. Also like other anti-inflammatory
(antirheumatic) agents they are ulcerogenic and in such
combination there may be bleeding from drug-induced
gastrointestinal lesions and ulcers.

piroxicam (38)

A 60-year-old man was taking warfarin 20 mg weekly,
piroxicam 20 mg daily and flurazepam 15 mg noct. as
required with a stable prothrombin time in the
therapeutic range. Stopping the piroxicam resulted in a
decreased prothrombin time. Two further rechallenges
over 10 months supported the impression that
piroxicam potentiates the hypoprothrombinaemic
response to warfarin. Piroxicam is an enolic derivative
structurally similar to phenylbutazone. By analogy the
piroxicam interaction with warfarin may be due to
changes in protein binding, and an effect on
metabolism which may be stereoselective for the S
isomer of warfarin.
The addition of piroxicam may be expected to increase
the prothrombin time of patients maintained on
warfarin.

sulindac (39, 40)

Two reports involving three patients suggest that
sulindac potentiates the anticoagulant effects of
warfarin. A report on 19 normal subjects suggests that
it does not (41).

Anticoagulant/antacid
(42)

There is some evidence to suggest that concomitant
administration of antacids may cause impaired
absorption of coumarin anticoagulants. The alkaline
environment produced by them causes a larger

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Combination

187

Interaction

proportion of ionized anticoagulant which is not so
well absorbed as the un-ionized form.

Anticoagulant/
antibiotic or
antibacterial agent
cephaloridine (11, 43)

Produces prolonged prothrombin times and potentiates
the anticoagulant effect due to impaired vitamin K
absorption from gut.

chloramphenicol (18)

Chloramphenicol potentiates the action of
anticoagulants by two mechanisms: (i) impairment of
absorption of vitamin K from the gut and (ii)
inhibition of coumarin metabolism in the liver.

co-trimoxazole and
other sulphonamide
+ trimethoprim
combinations

Potentiation of the anticoagulant action of warfarin has
been described by a number of workers. The
mechanism of action is uncertain but could be due to
decreased synthesis of vitamin K due to action of cotrimoxazole on the gut flora, or due to displacement of
warfarin from plasma binding sites or, as has been
suggested, due to inhibition of warfarin metabolism.
The interaction appears to be stereoselective with the
S isomer of warfarin (44).
A reduction in warfarin requirements should be
anticipated if co-trimoxazole is given to a patient
stabilised on warfarin.
It is nearly always preferable to give trimethoprim
alone rather than co-trimoxazole or other
sulphonamide/trimethoprimcombinations.

erythromycin (45)

Potentiation of anticoagulant effect of warfarin.

fluconazole

A recent report has described a warfarin-stabilized
patient in whom there was a prolonged prothrombin
time associated with nose bleeds, bleeding gums and
melaena when fluconazole was given (46). Similar
cases and studies of potential potentiation of the
anticoagulant action of warfarin by fluconazole have
been reported (47-50). Fluconazole has also been
reported to potentiate warfarin, phenytoin and
tolbutamide (51).

188

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anticoagulant1
antibiotic or
antibacterial agent cont.
griseofulvin
(9, 18, 20, 52)

Griseofulvin causes an increased rate of coumarin
metabolism due to enzyme induction; this antagonizes
the anticoagulant effect.

kanamycin (53)

Kanamycin may decrease vitamin K synthesis by
intestinal bacteria and, if administered for more than a
few days may, by this mechanism, potentiate the
effects of oral anticoagulants.

latamoxef sodium
(54-56)

Marked prolongation of bleeding time with
haemorrhage has been recognized in patients receiving
latamoxef sodium; this coagulopathy is reversible with
vitamin K (54-56). The mechanism of this reaction has
been suggested as platelet inhibition mediated by
antibiotic binding to the platelet surface; the time
schedule in some patients was too short for
suppression of vitamin K-producing gut microflora to
be responsible for the coagulopathy. A review article
(56) has cited 29 cases of hypoprothrombinaemia
caused by latamoxef and occasional bleeding in
debilitated patients.

metronidazole (57)

Oral metronidazole is being increasingly used in the
treatment of anaerobic infections and also as a
prophylactic measure against anaerobic infections in
patients undergoing surgery in addition to its original
use as a trichomonicidal agent. Metronidazole inhibits
warfarin metabolism due to its disulfiram-like action
inhibiting aldehyde dehydrogenase and hydroxylating
enzyme systems. Warfarin exists as two optical isomers
S( -) warfarin which is metabolized to 7-hydroxywarfarin and R(+) warfarin which is metabolized to 6hydroxy-warfarin and then to warfarin alcohols. The
effect of metronidazole seems to be stereospecific for
S(-) warfarin.
If introducing metronidazole to a stabilized
anticoagulated patient, reduce warfarin dosage in
anticipation of interaction.

nalidixic acid (20, 31)

This urinary antiseptic is bound in high proportion to
plasma proteins; it displaces warfarin sodium from

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Combination

189

Interaction

plasma binding sites in in vitro studies and thus may
potentiate the effect of the anticoagulant.
neomycin sulphate
(9, 18)
streptomycin sulphate
(58)
sulphonamides
(11, 18)
tetracyclines
(11, 18, 59)

These drugs reduce the amount of vitamin K
synthesized by intestinal bacteria and this may
potentiate the effect of an oral anticoagulant.
Sulphonamides also displace coumarins from protein
binding sites and so potentiate their anticoagulant
effect.
In one patient sulphafurazole, like all ‘sulfa’ drugs,
displaced warfarin from protein binding sites within 48
hr of start of concomitant dosage and potentiated
anticoagulant effects causing gross haematuria (60).

tetracyclines

A patient on warfarin ( 5 and 7.5 mg orally on alternate
days) to maintain patency of a femoral-popliteal bypass
graft showed enhanced anticoagulation after starting
on tetracycline (250 mg orally qds) for the treatment of
chronic blepharitis. His INR fell from 2.0-3.0 to 2.7.
Over the next several months, changes in INR
generally paralleled changes in the tetracycline dosage
(61).

Anticoagulant1
anticonvulsants
carbamazepine
felbamate
phenobarbitone
phenytoin
(diphenylhydantoin)
(20, 62-64)

When anti-epileptic drugs are taken in a steady-state
situation they do not result in unstable anticoagulant
control; such drugs are, however, potentially capable
of interacting to reduce coumarin half-life by their
enzyme-inducing action.

Carbamazepine induces microsomal enzymes and
shortens the plasma half-life of warfarin, lowers serum
warfarin concentrations, and reduces the
hypothrombinaemic effect under controlled conditions.
Discontinuing carbamazepine in one patient resulted in
a potentially dangerous increase in prothrombin time.

190

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Anticoagulant1
anticonvulsants cont.

Interaction

Care should be taken to adjust warfarin dosage when
stopping or starting carbamazepine in a patient
stabilized on anticoagulants.
A male patient with a long-standing aortic valve
replacement was receiving a weekly warfarin dose of
35 mg to maintain a target INR of 2.5 to 3.5.
Monotherapy for seizures with felbamate
(2400 mg/day) was started and raised to 3400 mglday
after 2 weeks. Two weeks after felbamate was started
his INR had increased to 7.5. Warfarin was therefore
withheld for 3 days and restarted at a dose of
5 mg/day. Three weeks later the INR had risen to 18.2
and warfarin was withheld again for 4 days and
restarted at a dose of 2.5 mg/day. The INR then
stabilized within the target range. At no stage did the
patient experience signs of bleeding. It was thought
that felbamate had inhibited warfarin’s metabolism
(65).
Phenytoin may displace coumarins from plasmabinding sites and therefore potentiate their
anticoagulant effect. Inhibition of coumarin
metabolism increases their plasma half-life from 9 to
36 hr (20).
Dicoumarol inhibits the metabolism of phenytoin in
the liver and thus potentiates its anticonvulsant effect
(66); other coumarins may be expected to have this
action, but not phenindione.

Anticoagulant/
antidepressant MAOIs
(11, 67, 68)
e.g.
phenelzine
iproniazid
isocarboxazid
mebanazine
nialamide
phenoxypropazine

MAOIs potentiate the anticoagulant action of
coumarins and may cause severe haemorrhage .

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Cornbination

191

Interaction

Tricyclic compounds
(11, 69, 70)
e.g.
amitriptyline
desipramine
dibenzepin
imipramine

Tricyclic antidepressants enhance the anticoagulant
effect of coumarin drugs due to their inhibition of the
liver metabolism of the anticoagulants. This may result
in haemorrhage .

Anticoagulant/
antidiabetic agent
chlorpropamide (71)
glibenclamide (73)
tolbutamide (18, 72)

Interactions are complex and mutual. The
sulphonylureas and coumarin anticoagulants compete
for plasma protein binding sites. The sulphonylureas
displace coumarins increasing their anticoagulant
action; this is followed by an antagonism of
anticoagulant effect due to increased metabolism of the
coumarins . Dicoumarol (bishy droxycoumarin)
increases the half-life of tolbutamide in diabetics and
in normal subjects (72). A similar effect has been
described with chlorpropamide (71). The elevated
blood levels of tolbutamide may precipitate
hypoglycaemia and may also increase the displacement
of dicoumarol from plasma binding sites.
A 77-year-old woman was maintained on warfarin for
over 30 years without difficulty. Forty-eight hours after
starting glibenclamide, she experienced bruising
around her right shoulder and upper arm, spreading to
the soft tissue of her chest wall and tracking down
towards her abdomen. Her INR had increased from
2.3 to 6.6. She was given fresh frozen plasma and
warfarin was stopped. Despite further transfusions with
fresh frozen plasma and fresh packed cells her
coagulation remained abnormal (INR 5.2).
Glibenclamide was stopped and within 24 hr her INR
had returned to normal (INR 2.2). However, her soft
tissue haemorrhage extended and formed two large
haematomas which became infected. The patient died
(73)

Anticoagulant/
antimalarial agent
proguanil (74-76)

A 59-year-old woman stabilized on warfarin for 9
years, presented with a 4-day history of haematuria,
bruising, abdominal and flank discomfort, and nausea
and vomiting. She had also been taking proguanil as a

192

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anticoagulant1
antimalarial agent cont.

prophylactic agent for 6 weeks. All drugs were stopped
and she was admitted to hospital. She had a high
prothrombin ratio (8.6) and other abnormal blood
values. She was treated with plasma and vitamin K and
her haematuria ceased after 3 days, and she remained
well thereafter with no other bleeding (74).
There are no previous reports of such an interaction.
However, proguanil is a prodrug that is metabolized to
cycloguanil which is structurally related to
trimethoprim, which has been reported to enhance the
effects of warfarin (75, 76). The mechanism of the
interaction is not known but it is unlikely to involve
changes in albumin binding of warfarin since only 14%
of circulating proguanil is in the bound form (76). It
has been suggested that antimalarial prophylaxis
should not include proguanil in patients taking
warfarin (74).

Anticoagulant/
antithyroid agent
thiouracil
meth ylthiouracil
propylthiouracil

The thiouracils may produce hypoprothrombinaemia;
the mechanism for this is unknown (77, 78)

Anticoagulant1
antituberculous agents
rifampicin (Rifadin,
Rimactane) (79)

Rifampicin stimulates warfarin metabolism.

Anticoagulant/cardiac
depressant
quinidine salts
(bisulphate, gluconate,
sulphate) (9, 18, 79)

Quinidine is cumulative in its action and may reduce
the synthesis of clotting factors thereby potentiating
the action of coumarin and indanedione
anticoagulants.

Anticoagulant/
cimetidine (Tagamet)
(80-91)

Studies in normal subjects and in patients have shown
that cimetidine interacts with stabilized warfarin
regimens to increase blood clotting ratio and
prothrombin by about 20%; plasma warfarin
concentrations almost doubled. Mechanisms have been

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Combination

193

Interaction

attributed to inhibition of warfarin metabolism (8087).
One controlled study investigated the effects of
cimetidine in a large population of patients receiving
stable warfarin regimens. The effect of two dosage
regimens of cimetidine (300 mg qds or 800 mg daily at
bedtime for 15 days) was determined in a cross-over
study on prothrombin time ratios (PTRs) of 27 patients
stabilized on conservative warfarin regimens giving a
PTR of 1.2-2.0.
The PRT increased with both cimetidine regimens,
although the mean PRT remained within current
recommendations for anticogulation. The mean PRT
after stabilization on cimetidine ranged from 1.65 to
1.75 for the 800-mg dose at bedtime, and from 1.70 to
1.82 for the 300-mg x 4/day regimen. Only two
patients achieved prothrombin times (PTs) of 30 sec
(upper limit of desired anticoagulation), and the
maximum PT was 30.5 sec. Warfarin AUCs increased
significantly with either regimen (39% for x 4/day and
21% for bedtime administration). The addition of the
two regimens of cimetidine dosage to a stabilized
warfarin regimen did not lead to any serious degree of
anticoagulation, despite decreased warfarin clearance.
None-the-less, cimetidine did increase PTRs and serum
warfarin concentrations, so the prothrombin time
should be monitored when cimetidine is added to
anticoagulant therapy (88).
Cimetidine interacts with the R but not the S isomer of
warfarin (89-91).
ranitidine (92)

In contrast ranitidine does not affect the anticoagulant
action of warfarin, since it is without an inhibitory
effect on hepatic P450 enzyme systems (92).

phenprocoumon/
cimetidine (93)

Cimetidine (400 mg bid) given to 10 patients taking
phenprocoumon (9-22.5 mg/week) did not affect
anticoagulant control or plasma phenprocoumon levels
(93). Phenprocoumon is excreted predominantly after
glucuronidation, thus cimetidine, which acts upon

194

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anticoagulant1
cimetidine cont.

mixed functional oxidase systems in the liver, does not
influence this metabolism. It was suggested that
cimetidine can be combined with phenprocoumon
without increasing the risk of bleeding complications
(93).

Anticoagulantl
clofibrate (9, 11, 18, 20)

Clofibrate may enhance the effect of coumarin
anticoagulants by increased receptor site affinity.
If concomitant use is envisaged the anticoagulant
dosage should be reduced, clofibrate introduced and
then the anticoagulant dose should be readjusted.
This interaction is likely with all fibrate cholesterol
lowering agents.

Anticoagulant1
corticosteroid (18)

Corticosteroid therapy reportedly increases
anticoagulant requirements; corticosteroids can induce
gastric ulceration with copious haemorrhage in
anticoagulated patients.
Initiation of corticosteroid dosage should be avoided
while the patient is anticoagulated.

AnticoagulantldanazoI
(94-100)

Treatment with danazol (200 mg bd) for 3 weeks
caused loss on anticoagulant control in a formerly
stabilized patient receiving long-term anticoagulation
with warfarin (5 mg daily). She was hospitalized due to
haematemesis and abdominal distension; her
prothrombin time was 168 sec (test:control ratio, 14:l)
(94) *
There are other reports of bleeding complications
associated with the commencement of danazol in
patients stabilized on warfarin (95-97). The
mechanism(s) underlying this interaction is uncertain.
Firstly, danazol may displace warfarin from plasma
albumin binding sites increasing the proportion of free
warfarin in the pasma, although this effect would be
transient due to the enhancement of hepatic

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Combination

195

Interaction

metabolism of warfarin. Secondly, it is possible that
danazol inhibits the metabolism of warfarin and thus
potentiates it action. It is known, for example that
danazol potentiates the anticonvulsant carbamazepine
by such a mechanism (98, 99). Thirdly, danazol is
thought to increase the plasma concentrations of
several clotting factors and also of the endogenous
anticoagulants, antithrombin I11 and protein C (100).
Thus it is possible that the combination of warfarin,
which inhibits the synthesis of vitamin K-dependent
clotting factors, and danazol, which enhances the
activity of endogenous anticoagulants, leads to an
increase in warfarin sensitivity. Possibly all three types
of mechanisms are involved (97).
Anticoagulant/
disulfiram

Disulfiram is known to augment the
hypoprothrombinaemic effects of warfarin (101). It is
now established that it acts by interacting primarily
with S-warfarin (102). Disulfiram did not change the
plasma concentrations of either enantiomorph, so it
may augment the anticoagulant effect of racemic
warfarin by directly affecting the hepatic mechanism
responsible for the hypoprothrombinaemia (102).

Anticoagulant/diuretic
ethacrynic acid
(20, 31)

Ethacrynic acid displaces warfarin from plasma binding
sites. The presence of hypo-albuminaemia or renal
insufficiency enhances the amount of warfarin
displaced.
Although this interaction is based on in vitro data,
there is some clinical evidence to indicate that
reduction in anticoagulant dosage may be necessary

combinations of
diuretics with
spironolactone (11)

Anticoagulant control very brittle; frequent changes of
coumarin dosage required to maintain steady reduction
in prothrombin time.
Patients on combinations of diuretics which include
spironolactone require frequent monitoring of
prothrombin time.

196

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anticoagulantsf food
supplements, vegetables
and herbal drugs
(103-109)
e.g.
Gon
Isocal
broccoli
herbal tea

Any substance containing large amounts of vitamin K
will, if taken in sufficient amount, antagonize the effect
of anticoagulants. A patient with mitral stenosis
satisfactorily maintained on nicoumalone had a clotting
ratio which fell from the therapeutic range to normal 2
days after commencing Gon which contains vitamin
K4. A patient maintained on warfarin 8 mg daily
required enteral nutrition and the clotting ratio fell,
requiring an increase in warfarin to 13 mg daily. The
warfarin dosage returned to 8 mg daily after the food
supplement was stopped. It is suggested that problems
with anticoagulation control are likely when patients
take in excess of 6.3 mg of phytomenadione per 1000
kcal (105). Problems have been encountered with
patients eating 1 lb of broccoli per day (106) and
taking herbal tea (107).
Ingestion of large amounts of vitamin K in a vegetablerich weight-reducing diet (1277 p.g vitamin K daily)
caused resistance to warfarin therapy in one patient.
Change to a regular diet (360 p.g vitamin K daily)
resulted in substantial reduction in warfarin resistance
(110).
Patients on anticoagulants should not embark on
weight-reducing diets without first discussing this with
their doctor; vegetable-rich diets should be avoided.
Patients with myocardial infarction are often advised to
lose weight and are often anticoagulated. Dieticians
are frequently unaware of this interaction and should
be informed.

Anticoagulant1
hypnotic or sedative
barbiturates (9, 11, 18,
20, 111)

Metabolism of coumarin anticoagulants is accelerated
due to barbiturate-induced metabolic enzyme
induction. Therefore larger doses of anticoagulant are
required. A patient on such a combination who stops
taking barbiturates runs the risk of haemorrhagic
episodes unless the dose of anticoagulant is adjusted
(11). Barbiturates may also decrease gastrointestinal
absorption of anticoagulants.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Cornbination

197

Interaction

No barbiturate should be started or stopped in a
patient on oral anticoagulants without careful
readjustment of anticoagulant dosage. The use of
chlordiazepoxide or diphenhydramine is a safer
alternative to a barbiturate.
chloral hydrate and
related compounds;
chloral betaine,
dichloralphenazone
(20, 112-114)

Chloral hydrate and related compounds displace
coumarins from plasma protein binding sites and
therefore initially may potentiate their anticoagulant
effect. However, they increase the metabolism of
coumarins by induction of hepatic microsomes and
therefore subsequently reduce their anticoagulant
effect.

ethchlorvynol (115, 116)
glutethimide (9, 18, 20)

These hypnotics increase the rate of metabolism of
coumarin anticoagulants due to induction of hepatic
microsomes.

Anticoagulant/
influenza vaccine
(109, 117, 118)

One patient who had been stabilized on warfarin for
12 years was hospitalized 10 days after influenza
vaccination with a massive upper gastrointestinal tract
haemorrhage and a prothrombin time of 48 sec. No
other cause for the augmented anticoagulation could
be identified. It was concluded that influenza vaccine
resulted in decreased inactivation of warfarin due to
depression of the mixed-function oxidase system which
metabolizes warfarin in the liver.
Caution should be exercized in giving such patients
influenza vaccine and changes in their warfarin
requirement should be carefully monitored.
More recently a study in elderly subjects showed that
clinically significant reactions to warfarin were rare
after influenza vaccinations and were no more frequent
than in those not receiving vaccinations.
Seven elderly subjects on warfarin showed no change
in their prothrombin or partial thromboplastin times
following influenza vaccination. Others have found no
effect of influenza vaccine on theophylline clearance in

198

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anticoagulant/
influenza vaccine cont.

normal subjects nor in those with chronic obstructive
airways disease.

Anticoagulant1
interferon

Increased anticoagulation was observed in a patient
with chronic hepatitis C , who was given human
lymphoblastoid interferon cr (6.0 MU/day) while
taking warfarin after heart surgery. Her maintenance
dose of warfarin had previously alternated between 3.5
and 2.5 mg daily. Before starting on interferon, she
showed a prothrombin time of 16.7 (INR = 1.60), a
Thrombotest result of 27% and a serum warfarin
concentration of <0.8 Fg/ml. After 2 weeks of
treatment with interferon, her prothrombin time
increased to 20.4 (INR = 1.99), Thrombotest results
decreased to 17% and warfarin concentrations rose to
5.2 p,g/ml. Her warfarin dose was reduced stepwise to
2.0 mg/day and some weeks later anticoagulation and
serum warfarin concentrations had returned to nearly
their initial values (119). The authors of this report
have also had to decrease the dose of warfarin in four
patients, two taking interferon p, and two taking
interferon (Y2b concomitantly with warfarin (119).
Interferon does not directly affect the coagulation
system, but it is known to inhibit hepatic microsomal
enzymes (120, 121), thus the potentiation of warfarin’s
activity is likely to be the result of a decrease in its
hepatic metabolism.

Anticoagulant/
ion-exchange resin
cholestyramine
(11, 122)

Hypoprothrombinaemia with bleeding due to failure of
intestinal absorption of vitamin K has been described
in the absence of anticoagulants, thus concomitant
therapy with anticoagulants might precipitate a
worsening condition. Potential interaction is further
complicated by results of animal studies which show
that cholestyramine may bind warfarin in the intestine
and so delay its absorption.

Anticoagulant/liquid
paraffin (123)

Liquid paraffin decreases the intestinal absorption of
lipid-soluble materials including vitamin K. Decreased

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Combination

199

Interaction

vitamin K absorption enhances the effect of oral
anticoagulants.
methyl salicylate
ointment

A woman maintained for 5 years on warfarin (45 mg/day) for a mitral valve replacement, was
prescribed methyl salicylate ointment for painful
osteoarthritis in both knees. After 2 weeks, she had
extensive bruising and her INR had increased from
2.0-3.0 to 6.09. Her blood salicylate level was
2.5 mmol/l. She was hospitalized and transfuzed with 3
units of fresh frozen plasma and her INR fell to 3.5.
She was discharged and told not to use the ointment
(124). It is known that salicylates depress prothrombin
formation in the liver and also displace warfarin from
protein binding sites and thus increase the risk of
bleeding (18). However, this has always tacitly been
thought to apply only with systemic dosage; this case
clearly shows that topical methylsalicylate, an over-thecounter item, should not be used by patients taking
warfarin.

Anticoagulant/oral
contraceptive
(125-127)

Oral contraceptives increase the synthesis of specific
blood coagulation factors; this may impair the efficacy
of anticoagulant therapy. This interaction may be of
importance in anticoagulating women with deep vein
thromboses, caused by oral contraceptive medication,
since higher doses of anticoagulant may be required
for some days even after stopping the contraceptive.

phenprocoumon (128)

The long-term use of oral contraceptives (combined
type, low-dose oestrogen) in seven healthy women was
associated with a significant increase in the clearance
of the anticoagulant phenprocoumon when compared
with a control group of women not taking OCs. Mean
values of AUC and tl12 values were significantly lower
in the OCs users (128). The mechanism involved is
thought to be accelerated glucuronidation of the
anticoagulant by the OC.
Although women who require anticoagulants do not
advisedly use oral contraceptives, it may be necessary
to have reliable contraception in women being treated

200

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Anticoagulant/oral
contraceptive cont.

Interaction

with an anticoagulant, if an intra-uterine device is not
acceptable. Careful monitoring of the anticoagulant
effect of treatment is therefore essential.
Paradoxically, oral contraceptives have also been
reported to potentiate the action of anticoagulants in
some patients. In those patients with oral
contraceptive-induced thrombosis, the oral contraceptive
agent must be discontinued.

Anticoagulant/proton
pump inhibitors (20)

Omeprazole can delay the elimination of warfarin due
to inhibition of hepatic metabolism

Anticoagulant/
quinine salts
(18, 20)

Quinine may depress the formation of prothrombin in
the liver and enhance the effect of anticoagulants.

Anticoagulant/
silicones (129)

Simethicone (activated dimethicone; e.g. Asilone,
Diloran) impairs warfarin absorption.

Anticoagulant/
sulphinpyrazone
(Anturan) (130-136)

The anticoagulant effect of warfarin is potentiated by
the platelet inhibitor sulphinpyrazone (130-134).
Plasma protein binding displacement of warfarin has
been suggested as the mechanism of interaction (130,
131), although other mechanisms may be involved in
view of the sustained reduction of warfarin
requirements during sulphinpyrazone treatment (132).
Sulphinpyrazone has been shown to have a
stereoselective effect in reducing metabolic clearance
of the S-warfarin enantiomorph (135). Prolonged
treatment with sulphinpyrazone in one patient caused a
biphasic interaction with warfarin potentiation followed
by antagonism. The likely mechanism of this biphasic
interaction is initial displacement of warfarin from
albumin binding sites followed by its enhanced hepatic
metabolism (134). A recent report described how
sulphinpyrazone caused a rapid increase in the
prothrombin ratio in five patients and the warfarin

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Cornbination

201

Interaction

dose had to be reduced by a mean of 46% to maintain
the PT ratio in the therapeutic range (136).
This is a clinically important interaction which can
cause life-threatening haematemesis and melaena
(131), due to its rapid and marked effect on the PT
ratio. Warfarin dose should be reduced by half and the
patient frequently monitored if sulphinpyrazone is
started during warfarin therapy. By contrast, in
patients already receiving both drugs, warfarin dose
will need to be increased if sulphinpyrazone is stopped
(136).
Anticoagulant1
tamoxifen

The Committee on Safety on Medicines have received
two reports of serious over-anticoagulation when
tamoxifen was used in combination with warfarin.
Considerable reductions in the daily dose of warfarin
were required to maintain safe anticoagulation (137).
A further five cases where the interaction was lifethreatening with marked prolongation of prothrombin
times, haematuria, and haematoma have been reported
in women taking tamoxifen who were then started on
warfarin to treat deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary
embolism (138-140).
Peliosis hepatis and fatal liver haemorrhage have been
reported in a patient who was receiving tamoxifen with
warfarin and a thyroxine-liothyronine preparation
(141). It has been suggested that, in addition to
enhancement of the effects of warfarin, competition
for the same metabolic enzyme systems might reduce
the activity of tamoxifen against tumours, but such a
suggestion remains speculative (139).

Anticoagulant/thyroid
hormones
dextrothyroxine sodium
(142-144)
e.g.
di-iodotyrosine
liothyronine sodium
thyroxin sodium

Thyroid and thyroid hormones may enhance the action
of anticoagulants (145). Clinical reports on this
interaction relate to dextrothyroxine (142-144) but
thyroid and other thyroid hormones may be expected
to produce a similar interaction. Increased
hypoprothrombinaemic response to warfarin followed
an increase in the dose of thyroid replacement in one
patient; another patient developed a bleeding episode

202

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Anticoagulantlthyroid
hormones cont.

Interaction

when thyroid replacement was begun in the presence
of long-term warfarin therapy (146). The mechanism of
this potentiation is thought to be an increased receptor
site affinity.

A reduced anticoagulant dosage requirement should be
anticipated.
Anticoagulant1
tranquilliser
benzodiazepines
(147, 148)
e.g.
chlordiazepoxide
diazepam
medazepam
oxazepam

Benzodiazepines have been shown in the clinic not to
interfere with the anticoagulant action of coumarin
derivatives; it appears safe to prescribe these agents to
patients on long-term oral anticoagulants. A complex
interaction between benzodiazepines and coumarins
takes place in digitalized patients (11).

The benzodiazepine tranquillisers are drugs of choice
when a sedative or hypnotic is required.
Anticoagulant/
vitamin K

Phytomenadione is a naturally occurring vitamin K
which maintains a normal concentration of
prothrombin in the blood plasma. It has largely
replaced the other compounds as an antidote to oral
anticoagulants since it has a rapid and prolonged
action. It is available in injection and oral dosage
forms. It is not an antidote to heparin.

weight-reducing diets
rich in vitamin K

Ingestion of large amounts of vitamin K in a vegetablerich weight-reducing diet (1277 pg vitamin K daily)
caused resistance to warfarin therapy in one patient.
Change to a regular diet (360 mg vitamin K daily)
resulted in substantial reduction in warfarin resistance
(149).

Anticoagulant/
xanthine oxidase
inhibitors
allopurinol (Aluline,

Decreased rate of coumarin metabolism. Control of
anticoagulant therapy is very brittle.
Avoid use of coumarin anticoagulants in gout patients
treated with allopurinol.

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

203

Combination

Interaction

Caplenal, Zyloric) (11,
14)

Phenindione is an acceptable alternative anticoagulant.

4. INTERACTIONS WITH INJECTED ANTICOAGULANTS AND
THROMBOLYTIC AGENTS
Combination

Interaction

Alteplase/
P-adrenergic blocking
agents
nitrates (150-152)

Acute administration of nitrates and P-adrenergic
blocking agents produce a decrease in hepatic blood
flow (HBF). Therefore these compounds would be
expected to decrease the clearance of alteplase by the
liver and increase its effect.

Alteplase/calcium
antagonists (150-152)

Calcium antagonists increase hepatic blood flow and
will increase the hepatic clearance with a reduction in
its effect.
Studies were performed in small groups of healthy
volunteers. Nifedipine was expected to change the
pharmacokinetics of alteplase by increasing the HBF.
In the study with nifedipine, the increase in HBF was
confirmed by estimation of the apparent HBF by
indocyanine green.

Alteplase/epoprostenol
(150, 153)

Epoprostenol increases hepatic blood flow and on
theoretical grounds could antagonize the action of
alteplase.

Alteplase/heparin
coumarins (154)

Prior administration of anticoagulants may increase the
risk of bleeding. Alteplase is commonly used in
conjunction with heparin.

Ancrod/plasma
expanders

Artificial plasma expanders, e.g. dextrins, may cause
severe bleeding in defibrillated patients and should not
be administered during or within 10 days of ancrod
therapy (155). Bleeding associated with ancrod should
be treated with specific antidote which is available
from the manufacturers.

204

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG I N T E R A ~ I O N S

Combination

Heparidantidiabetic
agent (156)
g1ipizide

Interaction

Glipizide is a second-generation sulphonylurea and has
pharmacokinetic properties which should lessen the
risk of hypoglycaemia.
A case was described of a 64-year-old diabetic
stabilized on glipizide 5 mglday who was given heparin
intravenous infusion. He suffered recurring
hypoglycaemia attacks over 4 days.

Sulphonylureas are highly bound to protein and even
small doses of heparin decrease indirectly the binding
of drugs by increasing free fatty acid concentrations,
an effect more pronounced in diabetes than others.
Heparin/protamine

When injected intravenously, protamine sulphate
neutralizes the anticoagulant action of heparin and is
used to check haemorrhage caused by heparin
overdosage. It is not an antidote to the oral
anticoagulants.

Heparidcoumarin
anticoagulant (157)

The combination of oral anticoagulant and heparin
prolongs the prothrombin time.

Streptokinase/drugs
affecting platelet
function

Drugs which affect platelet adhesiveness, such as
aspirip. other salicylates, pyrazolone, or indole
derivative, should not be administered concurrently
with streptokinase.

In ISIS-2 (158) it was demonstrated that the addition
of aspirin to streptokinase therapy did not further
increase the occurrence of major bleeding
complications (requiring transfusion and cerebral
bleeding). The excess of minor bleeding complications
caused by streptokinase was slightly greater in the
presence of aspirin (2.8% compared with 2.3% in the
absence of aspirin).
Streptokinase/heparin
(158-163)

If heparin or coumarin anticoagulants have been given
before commencing streptokinase therapy further
administration should cease (it is not advisable to give
streptokinase and heparin simultaneously). If

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

Combination

205

Interaction

immediate treatment with streptokinase is required
heparin should be neutralized with protamine sulphate.
In ISIS-2 the excess of bleeds during streptokinase was
increased by heparin (2.6 vs. 1.5% for minor bleeds
and 0.4 vs. 0.0% for major bleeds). In GISSI-2 (160)
and ISIS-3 (159) the addition of heparin to aspirin plus
a thrombolytic agent increased the occurrence of major
bleeds from 0.5 and O.8%, respectively to 1.0%.
Streptokinasel
traxenamic acid (161)

Traxenamic acid 10 mglkg body weight by slow
intravenous infusion will neutralize the effects of
streptokinase in the event of haemorrhage.

Recommended further reading
de Boer A. van Griensven. ((1995) Drug interactions with thrombolytic agents; current
perspectives. Clin Pharmacokinet 28, 315-326.
Griffin JP. (1994) Anticoagulants and skin necrosis. Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 13,
157-167.
Wells PS, Holbrook AM, Crowther NR, Hirsh J. (1994) Interactions of warfarin with
drugs and food. Ann Zntern Med 121, 676-683.

REFERENCES

1 Jones JK, Staffs JA. (1983) Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Safety 2, 115.
2 Griffin JP. (1994) Adv Drug React Toxicol Rev 13, 157.
3 Wells PS et al. (1994) Ann Zntern Med 121, 676.
4 de Boer A , van Griensven JMT. (1995) 28, 315.
5 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-1996) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London,
pp. 207-209.
6 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-1996) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London,
pp. 838-841.
7 Fears R. (1990) Pharmacol Rev 42, 201.
8 Petch MC. (1990) Br Med J 300, 483.
9 Udall JA. (1970) Clin Med 77, 20.
10 Editorial. (196)8) JAMA 206, 1709.
11 Williams JRB et al. (1976) QJ Med 45, 63.
12 Self TH et al. (1975) Lancet ii, 557.
13 Rawlins MD, Smith SE. (1973) Br J Pharmacol48, 693.
14 Vessel ES et al. (1970) N Engl J Med 283, 1484.
15 Martinowitz U et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 671.
16 Rees A et al. (1981) Br Med J 282, 1756.
17 Heger JL et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 529.
18 Koch-Weser J, Sellers EM. (1971) N Engl J Med 285, 487, 547.
19 Pyorala K, Kekki M. (1963) Lancet ii, 360.
20 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin (1972) 10, 25.

206

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

21 Acomb C, Shaw PW. (1985) Pharm J 234, 73.
22 Powell-Jackson PR. (1977) Br Med J 1, 1193.
23 McElnay JC, D’Arcy PF. (1977) Br Med J 2 , 773.
24 Serlin MJ et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol9, 287.
25 Orme M et al. (1976) Br Med J 1 , 200.
26 Stricker BHCh, Delhez JL. (1982) Br Med J 285, 812.
27 Azarnoff DL, Hunvitz A. (1970) Pharmacol Phys 4 , 1.
28 Hoffbrand BI, Kininmonth DA. (1967) Br Med J 2, 838.
29 Brodie BB. (1965) Proc R SOCMed 58, 946.
30 Self TH et al. (1978) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 12, 580.
31 Sellers EM, Koch-Weser J. (1970) Clin Pharmacol Ther 11, 524.
32 Holmes EL. (1966) A n n Phys Med 9 (Suppl), 36.
33 Anlitz AM, Awalt LF. (1969) Curr Ther Res 11, 360.
34 Anlitz AM et al. (1968) Curr Ther Res 10, 501.
35 Standing Advisory Committee, Royal College of Patologists (1982) Br Med J 285, 274.
36 Boeijinga JJ et al. (1982) Lancet i, 506.
37 Aggeler PM et al. (1967) N Engl J Med 276, 496.
38 Rhodes RS et al. (1985) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 19, 733.
39 Carter SA. (1979) Lancet ii, 698.
40 Ross JRY, Beeley L. (1979) Lancet ii, 1075.
41 Loftin JP, Vesell ES. (1979) J Clin Pharmacol 19, 733.
42 Ambre JJ, Fischer LJ. (1973) Clin Pharmacol Ther 14, 231.
43 Council on Drugs (1968) J A M A 206, 1289.
44 O’Reilly RSA. (1980) N Engl J Med 302, 33.
45 Bartle W. (1980) Arch Int Med 140, 985.
46 Baciewicz AM et al. (1994) A n n Pharmacother 28, 1111.
47 O’Reilly R. (1984) Arch Intern Med 144, 989.
48 Toon S et al. (1987) Eur J Clin Pharmacol32, 165.
49 Seaton TL et al. (1991) Ann Pharmacother 24, 1117.
50 Crussell-Porter LL et al. (1993) Arch Intern Med 153, 102.
51 Lazar JD, Wilner KD. (1990) Rev Infect Dis 12 (Suppl 3), S327.
52 Cullen SI, Catalan0 PM. (1967) J A M A 199, 582.
53 Kippel AP, Pitsinger B. (1968) Arch Surg 96, 266.
54 Pakter RL et al. (1982) J A M A 246, 100.
55 Weitekamp MR, Aber RC. (1983) J A M A 249, 69.
56 Leading Article (1981) Lancet ii, 23.
57 Kazmier FJ. (1976) Mayo Clin Proc 51, 782.
58 Moser RH. (1964) Diseases of Medical Progress, 2nd ed, Charles Thomas, Illinois, p.
134.
59 Searcy RL et al. (1965) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 179.
60 Sioris LJ et al. (1980) Arch Intern Med 140, 546.
61 Danos EA. (1992) Clin Pharm 11, 806.
62 Williams JRB et al. (1975) Q J Med 44,675.
63 Hansen JM et al. (1971) Clin Pharmacol Ther 12, 539.
64 Ross JRY, Beeley L. (1980) Br Med J 280, 1415.
65 Tisdel KA et al. (1994) A n n Pharmacother 28, 805.
66 Hansen JM et ul. (1971) Acta Med Scand 189, 15.
67 DeNicola P et al. (1964) Thromb Diathes Haemorrh (Stuttg) Suppl 12, 125.
68 Fumarola D et al. (1964) Huematologica 49, 1248.
69 Gould L et al. (1972) J A M A 22, 1460.
70 Remmer H, Mercker HJ. (1965) Ann N Y Acad Sci 123, 79.
71 Kristensen M, Hansen JM. (1968) Acta Med Scand 183, 83.
72 Solomon HM, Schrogie JJ. (1967) Metabolism 16, 1029.

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH ANTICOAGULANTS AND FIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS

73 Jassal SV. (1991) Br Med J 303, 789.
74 Armstrong G et al. (1991) Br Med J 303, 789.
75 O’Reilly R A and Morley CH (1979) Ann Intern Med 91, 34.
76 O’Reilly RA. (1980) N Engl J Med 302, 33.
77 Clin Alert (1968) Anticoagulants - Drug interactions, No 103.
78 Kazmier FJ, Spittal, JA. (1970) Mayo Clin Proc 45, 249.
79 Gazzangia AB, Stewart DR. (1969) N Engl J Med 280, 711.
80 Flind AC. (1978) Lancet ii, 1054.
81 Flind AC. (1978) Br Med J 2, 1367.
82 Hertzel D et al. (1978) Lancet ii, 649.
83 Serlin MJ et al. (1979) Lancet ii, 317.
84 Silver BA, Bell WSR. (1979) A n n Intern Med 90, 348.
85 Wallin BA et al. (1979) A n n Intern Med 90, 993.
86 Breckenridge AM. (1979) Br J Clin Pharmacol 8 , 392P.
87 Kerley B, Ali M. (1982) Can Med Assoc J 126, 116.
88 Sax MJ et al. (1987) Clin Pharm 6 , 492.
89 Choonara IA et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol 21, 271.
90 Toon S et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol21, 245.
91 Niopas I et al. (1991) Br J Clin Pharmacol32, 508.
92 Serlin MJ et al. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacol 12, 791.
93 Harenberg J et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 14, 292.
94 Goulborne IA, MacLeod DAD. (1981) Br J Obstet Gynaecol88, 950.
95 Small M et al. (1982) Scott Med J 27, 331.
96 Meeks ML et al. (1992) A n n Pharmacol26, 641.
97 Booth CD. (1993) Pharm J 250, 439.
98 Zielinski JJ et al. (1987) Ther Drug Monit 9 , 24.
99 Nelson MV. (1988) Am J Psychiatry 145, 768.
100 Grinick HR, Rick ME. (1983) N Engl J Med 308, 1393.
101 O’Reilly RA. (1974) Clin Pharmacol Ther 16, 348.
102 O’Reilly RA. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 29, 332.
103 Heald GE, Poller L. (1974) Br Med J 2, 455.
104 Watson AJ et al. (1984) Br Med J 288, 557.
105 Udall JA, Krock LB. (1988) Curr Ther Res 10, 207.
106 Stockley I. (1984) Pharmacy Int 5 , 165.
107 Kempin SJ. (1983) N Engl J Med 308, 1229.
108 Hogan RP. (1983) J A M A 249, 2679.
109 Patriarca PA et al. (1983) N Engl J Med 308, 1601.
110 Qureshi GD et al. (1981) Arch Intern Med 141, 507.
111 Cucinell AA et al. (1965) Clin Pharmacol Ther 6 , 420.
112 Boston Collaborative Drug Surveillance Program (1972) N Eng J Med 286, 53.
113 Sellers EM, Koch-Weser J. (1970) N Engl J Med 283, 827.
114 Breckenridge A et al. (1971) Clin Sci 40, 351.
115 O’Reilly RA. (1970) N Engl J Med 302, 33.
116 Johansson S. (1968) Acta Med Scand 184, 297.
117 Kramer P, McClain CJ. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 1262.
118 Gomolin I H et al. (1985) J Am Geriatr SOC33, 269.
119 Adachi Y et al. (1995) Br Med J 311, 202.
120 Williams SJ et al. (1987) Lancet ii, 939.
121 Okuno H. (1993) Hepatology 18, 65.
122 Gross L, Brotman M. (1970) Ann Intern Med 72, 95.
123 Becker GL. (1952) A m J Dig Dis 10, 344.
124 Chow WH et al. (1989) J R SOCMed 82, 501.
125 Shrogie JJ et al. (1976) Clin Pharmacol Ther 8 , 670.

207

208

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

126 FDA (1968) Revised Labelling for Oral Contraceptives.
127 Oral Contraceptives (1974) Bulletin, Vol 5, No 3, Health Protection Branch,
Department of Health and Welfare, Canada.
128 Monig H. (1990) Br J Clin Pharmacol30, 115.
129 Talbot JM, Heade BW. (1971) Lancet i, 1292.
130 Weiss M. (1979) Lancet i, 609.
131 Bailey RR, Reddy J. (1980) Lancet i , 254.
132 Gallus A, Birkett D. (1980) Lancet i, 535.
133 Jamil A et al. (1981) Chest 79, 375.
134 Nenci GG et al. (1981) Br Med J 282, 1361.
135 O’Reilly RA. (1982) Circulation 65, 202.
136 Miners J O et al. (1982) Eur J Clin Pharmacol22, 327.
137 Committee on Safety of Medicines (1989) Current Problems, No 26, May 1989, CSM,
London.
138 Lodwick R et al. (1987) Br Med J 295, 1141.
139 Tenni P et al. (1989) Br Med J 298, 93.
140 Ritchie LD, Grant SMT, (1989) Br Med J 298, 1253.
141 Loomus GN et al. (1983) Am J Clin Pathol80, 881.
142 Owens JG et al. (1962) N Engl J Med 266, 76.
143 Schrogie JJ, Solomon HM. (1967) Clin Pharmacol Ther 8 , 70.
144 Solomon HM, Schrogie JJ. (1967) Clin Pharmacol Ther 8 , 797.
145 Reynolds JEF. (ed) (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, London, The
Pharmaceutical Press, pp. 239, 1268.
146 Hansten PD. (1980) Drug Intel1 Clin Pharm 14, 331.
147 Breed WPM, Haanen C. (1971) Ned Tijdschr Geneesk 115, 1835.
148 Orme M et al. (1972) Br Med J 3 , 611.
149 Qureshi GD et al. (1981) Arch Intern Med 141, 507.
150 de Boer A, Van Griensven JMT. ((1995) Clin Pharmacokinet 28, 315.
151 van Griensven JMT et al. (1994) Brit J Clin Pharmacol37, 485P.
152 Van Griensven JMT et al. (1994) Circulation 90, 1553.
153 Nicolini FA et al. (1990) Circulation 81, 1115.
154 de Boer A et al. (1972) Thromb Haemost 68, 550.
155 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1968-87) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
83.
156 McKillon G. (1986) Br Med J 293, 1073.
157 Hansten PD. (1971) Drug interactions, 3rd ed, Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, p. 37.
158 ISIS-2 (Second International Study of Infarct Survival) (1988) Lancet ii, 359.
159 ISIS-3 (Third International Study of Infarct Survival (1992) Lancet 339, 753.
160 Groupo Italian0 per lo Studio della Sopravivenza nell. Infarto miocardio G ISSI-2
(1990) Lancet 336, 65.
161 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1279-1284.
162 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
687-690.
163 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
820-821.

2.4 DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH
LIPID LOWERING AGENTS
Lipid-lowering agents should be reserved for patients with coronary artery disease
and for those with a high risk of developing coronary artery disease on account of
multiple risk factors, which include severe hyperlipidaemia inadequately controlled
by diet. It is pointless to treat patients with hypolipidaemic agents unless dietary
advice is given and adhered to and steps taken to cease smoking.
Severe hyperlipidaemia may require treatment with combinations of lipid-lowering agents in addition to adherence to a strict low fat diet. Combinations of HMG
CoA reductase inhibitors with nicotinic acid or a fibrate carries a high incidence of
side effects. As a group it is probable that there is considerable inappropriate
prescribing since these agents should be used for specific hyperlipidaemia types. It
is also likely that they are over prescribed since all too often dietary measures are
not given adequate trial.
ANION EXCHANGE RESINS
Cholestyramine
Colestipol
Polidexide
Indications for use are WHO type IIa hyperlipidaemia. Other medication should
be taken 1hr before or 4-6 hr after anion exchange resins which can reduce their
absorption.
CLOFIBRATE TYPE
Beclofibrate
Bezafibrate
Ciprofibrate
Clofibrate
Fenofibrate
Gemfibrozil
Pirifibrate
Plafibride
The fibrate group can be regarded as ‘broad spectrum’ lipid-altering drugs. Their
main action is to reduce triglycerides and low-density cholesterol (LDC) and raise

209

210

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

high density cholesterol (HDL), Bezafibrate, fenofibrate, and gemfibrozil can be
used to treat type IIa, IIb, 111, IV and V hyperlipidaemias, ciprofibrate is not
regarded as ideal for type V, nor is clofibrate regarded as suitable for type I1 a
hyperlipidaemia.
There is an increased incidence of cholesterol gall bladder stones in patients
treated with this group of lipid-lowering drugs. Bezafibrate has produced liver
tumours in female rats (1). Clofibrate (2) has been shown to produce liver tumours
in rats and mice. In man, liver enzyme changes, liver dysfunction and hepatomegaly
have been reported.

NICOTINIC ACID DERIVATIVES
Acipimox
Nicofuranose
Nicotinic acid
Nicotinic acid and derivatives are used in Types IIa, IIb and IV hyperlipidaemia.
Doses of this group of agents is 1.5-3.0 gm per day. Side effects are vasodilation,
flushing, palpitations, headache, pruritis, rashes, gastric irritation with nausea and
vomiting, diarrhoea. Anaphylactoid reactions have been reported. Contruindications are peptic ulceration or pregnancy.

PROBUCOL
Probucol is the only member of this group and decreases both LDL and HDL
cholesterol. It promotes resolution of cholesterol xanthomata. Probucol has been
reported to cause angioneurotic oedema. Fatal cardiac arrhythmias have been reported in animal studies and prolonged Q T intervals in man. It should not be
administered to patients with recent myocardial damage. The risk of arrhythmias
is increased in patients who are also taking tricyclic antidepressants or class I or I11
antiarrhythmic agents or phenothiazines.

HMG CoA REDUCTASE GROUP
Lovastatin
Mevastatin
Pravastatin
Simvastatin
Lovastatin, the first member of this group, was originally extracted from Aspergillus
terreus. These agents competitively inhibit 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarylCo-enzyme
A (HMG CoA) reductase, an enzyme that catalyzes a step in cholesterol synthesis
in the liver. They are more potent than anion exchange resins in lowering LDL

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH LIPID-LOWERING AGENTS

211

cholesterol but less effective than the clofibrate group of drugs in reducing triglycerides.
The main side effect is myalgia and rhabdomyolysis. This complication is more
common in patients receiving an HMG CoA reductase inhibitor in conjunction with
a fibrate or nicotinic acid derivative.
Simvastatin has been found to cause small reductions in cortisol synthesis.
Proteinuria has also been described in patients receiving the ‘statin’ group of
hypolipidaemic agents (3).
Simvastatin has also been shown to be porphyrogenic in animals and in in vitro
systems. It should not be given to patients with porphyria (4).
Lens opacities were found in 13 of 101 patients taking part in an 18-week study
of lovastatin ( 5 ) , but there was no deterioration in 11 of these patients after
26 months. Other studies have failed to confirm this adverse effect.

OMEGA-3 MARINE TRIGLYCERIDES
Fish oils rich in omega-3 marine triglycerides are claimed to be effective in the
treatment of severe triglyceridaemia. Paradoxically it can cause marked increases
in plasma cholesterol. There is some doubt as to whether the hypertriglyceridaemic
effect is sustained during long-term therapy.

SQUALENE SYNTHETASE INHIBITORS
New approaches to lipid lowering includes the development of squalene synthetase
inhibitors. Squalene is a precursor not only in the synthesis of cholesterol but also
of steroidal hormones.

ACAT AND CETP INHIBITORS
Specific inhibitors of these enzymes are under development.

MUSCLE DAMAGE ASSOCIATED WITH LIPID-LOWERING DRUGS
Muscle disorders are well recognized with lipid-lowering agents of the fibrate group,
e.g. bezafibrate, ciprofibrate, clofibrate, gemfibrozil and fenofibrate, and of the
HMG CoA reductase group, e.g. prevastatin, simvastatin and fluvastatin. Rhabdomyolysis appears to be rare with an incidence of one case per 100,000 treatment
years.
The risk of muscle toxicity is greatly increased in patients with renal impairment,
or hypothyroidism. Combined treatment with a fibrate and an HMG CoA reductase
inhibitor greatly increases the risk of muscle damage. There also appears to be a
serious risk of muscle damage if an HMG CoA reductase inhibitor or a fibrate are
given concurrently with cyclosporin.

212

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

Interaction

ANION EXCHANGE RESINS
Thiazide diuretics/
There is reduced absorption of a wide range of
Propranolol/
medicines, particularly acidic drugs, caused by
Tetracyclines/
cholestyramine, colestipol and other lipid-lowering
Thyroxine/anion
agents of this class. Enterohepatic circulation may be
exchange resins (6-9)
reduced. Medications should be taken 1hr before or
4-6 hr after these agents.
Anticoagulants/anion
exchange resins
(10, 11)

The effect of anion exchange resins on the
anticoagulant effect of warfarin (12), nicoumalone, or
phenidione may be to reduce or enhance the effect.
This depends on whether the greatest impairment of
absorption is on the anticoagulant or vitamin K.
Cholestyramine and colestipol impair the absorption of
fat and fat-soluble vitamins A , D, E and K. Chronic
use of cholestyramine may be associated with
hypoprothrombinaemia associated with vitamin K
deficiency, and this has led to increased bleeding
tendency (13).

Acarbose/anion
exchange resins
(6, 7, 8)

The hypoglycaemic effect of acarbose is enhanced by
cholestyramine.

Dietary fat/anion
exchange resins (8)

Cholestyramine may cause fatty diarrhoea
(steatorrhoea) due to reduced absorption of fat and
bile salts.

Vitamindanion
exchange resins (8)

Absorption of fat-soluble dietary vitamin is grossly
impaired. Vitamin supplementation may be necessary.

CLOFIBRATE GROUP
Anticoagulants/
Phenytoin/
Sulphonylurea oral/
Hypoglycaemics/
clofibrate group
(1, 2, 14, 15)

Clofibrate displaces acidic drugs from plasma protein
binding sites and thereby potentiates their effects.
Patients taking anticoagulants should in general have
their anticoagulant dosage halved if clofibrate is to be
co-administered. Patients on oral sulphonylurea
hypoglycaemics, e.g. tolbutamide have been reported
to develop hypoglycaemia when treated with fibrate
agents. Co-administration of the fibrate group of

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH LIPID-LOWERING AGENTS

Combination

213

Interaction

hypolipidaemic agents with phenytoin has led to
phenytoin toxicity.

HMG CoA reductase
inhibitor/clofibrate
group (1, 14, 16)

There is an increased risk of myalgia, myopathy and
rhabdomyolysis when lipid-lowering agents of these
two types are co-administered.

Anion exchange
resin/gemfibrozil (14)

The bioavailability of gemfibrozil is reduced when coadministered with cholestyramine type hypolipidaemic
agents. If both types of agent are to be used to treat
hyperlipidaemia they should be taken 4-6 hr apart.

Colestipol/gemfibrozil
(17)

The bioavailability of gemfibrozil was reduced by the
concomitant administration of colestipol, but was
unaffected when gemfibrozil was taken either 2 hr
before or 2 hr after colestipol (17).

Warfarin/gemfibrozil
(18)

Gemfibrozil has been reported to enhance the effects
of warfarin.

NICOTINIC ACID DERIVATIVES
Anion exchange
Cholestyramine does not affect the absorption of
resin/acipimox
acipimox, it enhanced hypolipidaemic effects.
(19, 20)
Alcohol/acipimox (19)

Patients taking acipimox should avoid alcohol.

Aspirinhicotinic acid
derivatives (6)

The flushing caused by nicotinic acid derivative can be
reduced by taking 75 mg aspirin 30 min before. The
flushing is thought to be prostaglandin mediated.

PROBUCOL
Phenothiazined
tricyclic
antidepressants/
class I and I11 antiarrhythmic/agents/
probucol (21-25)

Probucol can induce cardiac arrhythmias, it increases
the QT interval. The risk of a probucol-associated
dysrrhythmia is enhanced by phenothiazines, tricyclic
antidepressants, and Class I and I11 anti-arrhythmic
agents.

214

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

HMG CoA REDUCTASE INHIBITORS
The anticoagulant effects of warfarin and nicoumalone
Anticoagulants/
are enhanced. Hypoprothrombinaemia and bleeding
simvastatin pravastatin
has been reported in patients on warfarin given
(1)
lovastatin (26)
lovastatin.

Cyclosporinl
simvastatin (27)
pravastatin (28)
lovastatin (29, 30, 31)

Increased risk of myalgia, myositis and
rhabdomyolysis.
There have been a number of reports of myopathy and
rhabdomyolysis in patients receiving
immunosuppressant therapy following transplant
surgery on lovastatin.

Erythromycin1
lovastatin (32)

Reports of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis being
accentuated by erythromycin given in combination with
lovastatin exist.

Lipid-lowering agents/
simvastatin (27)
pravastatin (28)

Increased risk of muscle damage when a ‘statin’ type
hypolipidaemic agent is coadministered with a ‘fibrate’
type of lipid-lowering drug.

Lovastatin (33, 34)

Increased risk of muscle damage exists when lovastatin
has been administered in combination with gemfibrozil
(33, 34) and nicotinic acid (35).

Thyroxine/simvastatin
pravastatin (36, 37)

This group of drugs has been associated with the
development of both hyperthyroidism and
hypothyroidism in patients on thyroxine.

OMEGA-3 TRIGLYCERIDES
Anticoagulants/
Omega-3 triglycerides have antithrombotic activity and
maxepa (28)
should be given with caution to patients with
haemorrhogic disorders or on anticoagulants.
Antidiabetic
agentslmaxepa
(39-43)

A deterioration in control of blood sugar has been
reported in both insulin- and non-insulin-dependent
diabetics.

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH LIPID-LOWERING AGENTS

215

REFERENCES

1 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
261-263 (bezafibrate).
2 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
2003-2004 (clofibrate).
3 Deslypere JP et al. (1990) Lancet 336, 1453.
4 Moore MR, McColl KEL. (1991) Porphyria drug lists. Glasgow, Porphyria Research
Unit, University of Glasgow.
5 Hunninghake DB et al. (1988) J A M A 259, 354.
6 British National Formulary. (1996) No, 31, Appendix 1. British Medical Association and
Royal Pharmaceutical Society, London.
7 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1860-1863 (Colestid).
8 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
316-317 (cholestyramine).
9 Northcutt RG et al. (1969) J A M A 208, 1857.
10 Williams JRB et al. (1976) Quart J Med 45, 63.
11 Gross L, Brotman M. (1970) A n n Intern Med 72, 95.
12 Robinson DS. (1970) Clin Pharmacol Ther 12, 491.
13 Shojania AM, Grewar D. (1986) Can Med Assoc J 134, 609.
14 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1194-1 195 (gemfibrozil).
15 Gugler R. (1978) Clin Pharmacokinet 3 , 425.
16 Committee on Safety of Medicines. (1995) Rhabdomyolysis associated with lipid lowering
drugs. Curr Problems Pharmacovigilance 21, 3.
17 Forland SC et al. (1990) J Clin Pharmacol30, 29.
18 Ahmad S. (1990) Chest 98, 1041.
19 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1302-3 (acipimox).
20 Series JJ et al. (1990) Br J Clin Pharmacol30, 49.
21 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
947-8 (probucol).
22 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1993) The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th ed, The Pharmaceutical Press,
London, p. 993.
23 Troendle G et al. (1982) Lancet i, 1179.
24 Dujovne CA et al. (1984) Eur J Clin Pharmacol26, 735.
25 Naukkarin V et al. (1989) Curr Ther Res 45, 232.
26 Ahmad S. (1990) Arch Intern Med 150, 2407.
27 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1031 (simvastatin).
28 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1780 ( pravastatin).
29 Norman DJ et al. (1988) N Engl J Med 318, 46.
30 Reaven P, Witzturn JL. (1988) A n n Intern Med 109, 597.
31 East C et al. (1988) N Engl J Med 318, 47.
32 Ayanian J Z et al. (1988) A n n Intern Med 109, 682.
33 Kogan AD, Orenstein S. (1990) Postgrad Med J 66, 294.
34 Marais GE, Larson KK. (1990) A n n Intern Med 112, 228.
35 Prerce LR et al. (1990) J A M A 264, 713.
36 Lustgarten BP. (1988) A n n Intern Med 109, 171.
37 Demke DM. (1989) N Engl J Med 321, 1341.
38 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1087 (Maxepa).

216

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

39 Glauber H et al. (1988) Ann Intern Med 108, 663.
40 Kasim SE et al. (1988) J Clin Endocrinol Metab 67, 1.
41 Schectman G et al. (1988) Diabetes 37, 1567.
42 Hendra TJ et al. (1990) Diabetes Care 13, 821.
43 Vessby B, Boberg M. (1990) J Intern Med 228, 165.

2.5. DIURETICS
INTRODUCTION
Diuretics promote the excretion of water and electrolytes by the kidneys. They are
used in the treatment of heart failure or in hepatic, renal, or pulmonary disease
when salt and water retention has resulted in oedema or ascites. Diuretics are used
either alone or in combination with other agents in the treatment of hypertension.
There are undoubtedly too many diuretics available, especially within the thiazide
group. The major groups of diuretics are as follows:

1. THIAZIDE (BENZOTHIAZIDE) AND STRUCTURALLY RELATED
DIURETICS:
althiazide
indapamide
bemetizide
mebutizide
bendrofluazide
mefruside
benzylhydrochlorothiazide methylclothiazide
buthiazide
meticrane
chlorothiazide
metolazone
chlorthalidone
paraflutizide
clopamide
penflutizide
clorexolone
polythiazide
cyclopenthiazide
quinethazone
cyclothiazide
teclothiazide
epithiazide
trichlormethiazide
hydrochlorothiazide
tripamide
hydroflumethiazide
xipamide
They are moderately potent diuretics which inhibit sodium and chloride reabsorption at the begining of the distal convoluted kidney tubules and produce a corresponding increase in potassium excretion.
Prolonged administration may produce hypokalaemia, the magnitude of the K C
deficit is often underestimated especially in geriatric patients who may be K+
depleted because of a simple lack of intake even before diuretic treatment is begun.
Diuretic-induced hypokalaemia intensifies the cardiac effect and toxicity of digoxin
and related cardiac glycosides. Thiazides may provoke hyperglycaemia and glycosuria in diabetics and other susceptible patients; they may also cause hyperuricaemia
and precipitate attacks of gout.

217

218

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

2. LOOP (OR ‘HIGH-CEILING’) DIURETICS:
azosemide
frusemide (furosemide)
bumetanide
muzoIimine
ethacrynic acid
piretanide
etozolin
torasemide
They produce an intense dose-dependent diuresis of relatively short duration and
they may be effective where thiazides have failed. They have similar adverse effects
to the thiazides, and in addition may cause tinnitus and deafness (e.g. ethacrynic
acid (1-3), frusemide (4)) especially in patients with renal insufficiency. Early
reports suggested that bumetanide might be less ototoxic than frusemide ( 5 ) . However, both drugs can cause deafness especially when given in large doses to patients
with renal impairment. Although ethacrynic acid is generally considered to have
less pronounced effects on carbohydrate metabolism than frusemide or the thiazides,
reductions in glucose tolerance have been reported (6-8). Frusemide and ethacrynic
acid may enhance the nephrotoxicity or ototoxicity of other drugs particularly in
patients with renal impairment.

3. POTASSIUIM-SPARING DIURETICS:
amiloride
spironolactone
canrenoate potassium
triamterene
canrenone
They have a relatively weak diuretic effect and are used in conjunction with thiazides
or loop diuretics. Spironolactone is a steroid having close structural similarity to
aldosterone; it acts as a competitive inhibitor of aldosterone and therefore increases
Na+ and reduces K + excretion in the distal renal tubules. It has a slow and prolonged action and can be combined with other diuretics, usually thiazides.
Canrenone has similar actions and use to those of spironolactone; the potassium
salt is a soluble form of canrenone and is suitable for parenteral administration.
Amiloride and triamterene also diminish the excretion of K+ and are used in
combination with other diuretics to counteract their K’ depleting effects.
4. OSMOTIC DIURETICS:
isosorbide
mannitol
urea
They raise the osmality of plasma and tubular fluid. They are rarely used in heart
failure as they may acutely expand the blood volume. Mannitol is used in cerebral
oedema.

DIURETICS

219

5. MERCURIAL DIURETICS:
mersalyl sodium
They are effective diuretics but are now rarely used because of their nephrotoxicity;
mersalyl must be given by i.m. injection, i.v. use may cause severe hypotension
and sudden death.

6. CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS:
acetazolamide
dichlorphenamide
dorzolamide
methazolamide
They are weak diuretics and are used mainly to treat raised intraocular pressure.
They inhibit the ion-exchange in the renal tubules which is catalysed by the enzyme
carbonic anhydrase. They thus increase the excretion of cations, chiefly Na+ and
K + , and by doing so promote diuresis.
Interactions between diuretics and other diuretics are summarized in the following
Table of Drug Interactions; for a general review of interactions, including useful
interactions, between diuretics and other drugs,see the review article by Crook and
Nies (9).
combination

Interaction

Diuretidanticoagulant
(10, 11)

There have been a number of studies on the effects of
diuretics on anticoagulants; tienilic acid (now
withdrawn) produced the most serious interaction,
enhancing the activity of ethylbiscoumacetate (12),
nicoumalone (13), and warfarin (14) and has led to
haemorrhage. Ethacrynic acid enhances the effects of
warfarin (15) although not to the same severe effect as
tienilic acid. Chlorthalidone (16) and spironolactone
(17) have both been associated with a reduction of
warfarin’s activity in healthy subjects, and it has been
suggested that this might be due to the diuresis
concentrating the circulating clotting factors. However,
bumetanide, frusemide and the thiazides do not appear
to affect the actions of warfarin.

DiureWantidiabetic

Thiazides (18), ethacrynic acid (18), frusemide (19),
and triamterene (19) have long been known to elevate
the blood sugar level in diabetics and prediabetics.
They antagonize the action of antidiabetic drugs
especially the sulphonylureas. The mechanism is

220

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antidiabetic cont.

thought to be partly due to K+ loss induced by the
diuretic. Depression of pancreatic islet tissue may also
be involved (20). Diabetic patients receiving diuretics
should be carefully monitored for possible decreased
diabetic control. If necessary, a less diabetogenic
diuretic should be substituted and potassium
supplementation may be helpful.

Diuretic/corticosteroid

K+-losing diuretics given together with corticosteroids
may enhance the total K+ loss. This combination may
result in severe K t loss and the patients electrolyte
balance must be carefully monitored (21). (See also
thiazide/corticosteroid interaction below.)

Diuretic/lithium

Amiloride and other K+-sparing diuretics have no
effect on ithium excretion, but acetazolamide may
increase lithium excretion, transiently (22) Diureticlithium interactions and the precautions to be observed
have been reviewed (23). Thiazide diuretics produce
sodium depletion by inhibiting distal tubular sodium
reabsorption. The consequent increase in proximal
tubular reabsorption frequently results in an increase
in plasma lithium concentrations (22) with a risk of
toxicity (24, 25).
Loop diuretics (bumetanide, ethacrynic acid,
frusemide) seem less likely to cause lithium retention,
although caution is warranted especially in patients on
dietary sodium restrictions (22, 25). It has been
suggested that if diuretic therapy is necessary in
patients stabilized on lithium, a reduction of 25-50%
of the lithium dose should be initiated together with
twice weekly monitoring until re-stabilized (22, 25, 26)
and that loop-diuretics would be preferable.

DiureWNSAID (27-33)

There are an increasing number of reports of
interactions between diuretics and NSAIDs. They
decrease the diuretic and hypotensive effect of the
diuretic. It has been suggested that the mechanism
involved may be the interference with the production
of renal prostaglandins which are required to mediate
the action of diuretics. This appears to be a class effect

DIURETICS

Combination

221

Interaction

of the NSAIDs. (See entries below under frusemide,
thiazides and triamterene .)
The attenuation of diuresis is an important clinical
effect which is capable of inducing cardiac failure and
negating the hypotensive effects of diuretics. NSAIDs
are therefore generally contraindicated in patients
requiring diabetic therapy.
Diuretic/
trimethoprim

There are reports of severe hyponatraemia in patients
taking trimethoprim with co-amiloride (34) or
hydrochlorothiazide (35).

Acetazolamide/lithium

Acetazolamide impairs the proximal tubular
reabsorption of lithium and increases its renal
excretion. This increased lithium excretion could
impair the antipsychotic effect of lithium (36). Lithium
and acetazolamide should not be given together; if
such a combination is necessary, the dose of lithium
should be increased to compensate for the increased
lithium excretion and to maintain a satisfactory
antipsychotic effect. Alternative diuretics, thiazides
and triamterene also affect lithium excretion but
frusemide does not apparently interact with lithium.

Acetazolamide/quinidine Acetazolamide tends to make the urine alkaline, this
results in an increased proportion of un-ionized
quinidine. Renal tubular reabsorption of quinidine is
thus increased and serum levels may rise, thereby
increasing the risk of side effects and toxicity (37-39).
Care should always be taken in prescribing urinealkalinizing agents (this includes sodium bicarbonate)
for patients receiving quinidine.
Amiloride/ACE
inhibitor, K+-sparing
drugs and K+
supplements

There is a risk of hyperkalaemia if amiloride is given
in association with an ACE inhibitor. Amiloride
should not be given to patients with hyperkalaemia or
renal impairment and should not be given with
potassium-sparing drugs or potassium supplements
(40).
Elderly patients and patients with impaired renal
function or diabetes melitus are at particular risk of
developing hyperkalaemia. It should be given with care

222

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

Interaction

Amiloride/ACE
inhibitor, K+-sparing
drugs and K+
supplements cont.

to patients likely to develop acidosis, to diabetics, and
to those with impaired renal or hepatic function.
Amiloride should be discontinued at least 3 days
before glucose tolerance tests because of the risks if
patients are hyperkalaemic. Serum electrolytes and
blood-urea nitrogen should be estimated periodically
(40-44).

Amiloride/digoxin

Amiloride increased the renal clearance of digoxin and
reduced the extrarenal digoxin clearance in six healthy
subjects after a single i.v. dose of digoxin. It also
inhibited the digoxin-induced positive inotropic effects,
but the clinical implications in cardiac patients are
unknown (45).

Amiloride/lithium

Amiloride and other K+-sparing diuretics have no
effect on ithium excretion, but acetazolamide may
increase lithium excretion, transiently (22)
DiureticAithium interactions and the precautions to be
observed have been reviewed (23).
(See also entry on diuretic/lithium interactions above.)

Ethacrynic
acid/aminoglycoside
antibiotic

Ethacrynic acid is ototoxic in its own right and will
potentiate the ototoxicity of the aminoglycoside
antibiotics and other ototoxic drugs. This effect is most
marked in uraemic patients (46, 47). This combination
should be avoided; use an alternative diuretic (not
frusemide). There is some evidence that the renal
toxicity of the aminoglycosides is also enhanced by
ethacrynic acid.

Ethacrynic acid/cardiac
glycosides

The effect and toxicity of digoxin and other cardiac
glycosides are enhanced by hypokalaemia which may
follow treatment with the thiazides and other K+losing diuretics (48,49).

Frusemide/antibiotics

Frusemide may enhance the nephrotoxicity of
cephalosporin antibiotics and the ototoxicity of
aminoglycosides (50). Clinical reports of transient
ototoxicity have followed high-dose i.v. frusemide
therapy in patients with diminished renal function.
Combinations of frusemide with aminoglycoside

DIURETICS

Combination

223

Interaction

antibiotics may potentiate the ototoxicity of the
antibiotic (See also frusemide/gentamicin interaction
below .) This interaction is potentially hazardous and
should be avoided; if possible an alternative diuretic
(not ethacrynic acid) should be substituted. There is
also some evidence that the renal toxicity of the
aminoglycosides is also increased by frusemide. (See
also review article (51).)
Frusemide/anticonvulsant The diuretic effect of frusemide is substantially
reduced by concomitant antiepileptic therapy (52,53);
the mean diuretic effect of oral dosage (20 or 40 mg)
was, respectively, 68 and 51% that of controls (52).
Frusemide/
antihypertensive

Excessive hypotension can occur when frusemide is
used in conjunction with other antihypertensive agents.
Particular care should be taken with ACE inhibitors
since combination with frusemide can result in marked
reduction in blood pressure (54).

Frusemide/
carbamazepine

There are reports of symptomatic hyponatraemia
associated with the concomitant use of carbamazepine
with frusemide or hydrochlorothiazide (55).

Frusemide/chloral
hydrate

A syndrome of flushing, tachycardia, raised blood
pressure and severe diaphoresis occurred following IV
dosage of frusemide to six patients who had received
oral chloral hydrate during the preceding 24 hr. (56).
The reaction re-occurred in one patient on rechallenge.
A subsequent retrospective study (57) among patients
who had received both drugs showed that one patient
suffered a similar reaction and two had possibly been
affected (57). A similar interaction has been reported
in an 8-year-old child (58).

Frusemidelgentamicin

Glomerular filtration rate fell significantly after i.v.
bolus of frusemide (40 mg) in seven patients; a similar
though less marked fall in gentamicin clearance
occurred in six of these. Small but consistent increases
in plasma gentamicin concentrations were observed
after frusemide, and in two patients they rose to within
the toxic range (16 and 21 p,g/ml, respectively). This

224

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Frusemide/gentamicin
cont.

reduction in clearance may explain the enhanced risks
of nephrotoxicity or ototoxicity in patients receiving
both aminoglycosides and diuretics (59). Such a
combination should only be used with caution and the
patient should be carefully monitored for both renal
and auditory functions.

Frusemide/NS AID
(flurbiprofen)

Renal osmolal clearance after a standard water load
was measured in normal subjects. After flurbiprofen
(100 mg orally) the osmolal clearance fell by 29%.
After frusemide (40 mg orally or 20 mg i.v.) the
osmolal clearance increased by 105 and 140%,
respectively, but following treatment with flurbiprofen
the corresponding increases in osmolal clearance were
only 19 and 90%. This antagonism between a NSAID
and a diuretic may occur with other NSAIDs and may
be a common and clinically important interaction (60).
The patient should be monitored to ensure that
diuresis is adequate, if necessary the dose of the
diuretic should be increased.

Frusemide/phenytoin

Epileptics being controlled with phenytoin have a
diminished response to frusemide (52). Studies in
volunteers have shown that the diminished response is
due to decreased (up to 50%) intestinal absorption of
frusemide; possibly this is related to a phenytoininduced increase in Naf absorption. The dose of
frusemide may have to be substantially increased to
obtain a satisfactory diuresis.

Frusemide/probenecid

Probenecid reduces the renal clearance of frusemide
(61-64) and reduces its diuretic effect (62, 63).

Frusemide/skeletal
muscle relaxant

Frusemide may potentiate the effect of tubocurarine
and other non-depolarizing muscle relaxants by
depleting serum Kf (65). It is recommended that oral
frusemide be discontinued for 1 week and parenteral
frusemide for 2 days prior to elective surgery.

Frusemide/theophylline

Frusemide (40 mg by i.v. bolus) caused an average
increase of 29 p,g/ml in serum theophylline
concentrations in ten patients maintained at a steady

DIURETICS

Combination

225

Interaction

state on a continuous i.v. aminophylline infusion. A
reduction in the volume of distribution of theophylline
is the most likely mechanism for this interaction. (66).
Patients stabilized on a theophylline regimen should be
monitored closely during the addition or
discontinuation of frusemide therapy.
Metolazone/captopril

Deterioration in renal function occurred in a 65-yearold woman when metolazone (5 mg daily) was added
to treatment with captopril, frusemide, spironolactone
and digoxin for heart failure. An interaction between
captopril and metolazone was suspected and normal
renal function returned when both these drugs were
stopped. It was suggested that natriuresis and a fall in
blood pressure caused by the diuretic might have
compromized an already low renal perfusion pressure
when autoregulatory mechanisims were blocked by
captopril (67).

Metolazone/cyclosporin

An increase in serum creatinine concentration in a
renal transplant patient was attributed to a toxic drug
interaction between metolazone and cyclosporin.
Creatinine concentrations returned to pretreatment
levels when metolazone was discontinued (68).

Metolazone/frusemide

Severe electrolyte disturbances may occur in patients
given the thiazide diuretic metolazone together with
frusemide. The BNF cautions that patients taking this
combination should be monitored carefully (69).

Metolazone/glibenclamide Hypoglycaemia occurred in a diabetic patient,
controlled on glibenclamide, 40 hr after initiation of
treatment with metolazone (5 mg daily) (70). Studies
on protein binding in vitro gave no evidence of
displacement of glibenclamide from binding sites.
Spironolactone/ACE
inhibitor

Hyperkalaemia causing complete heart block was
associated with concomitant administration of
spironolactone and captopril in a 72-year-old woman
(71). A similar reaction resulted in a patient taking
spironolactone and enalapril (72). Hyperkalaemia in a
further patient taking spironolactone and enalapril

226

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Spironolacone/ACE
inhibitor cont.

persisted for over 48 hr despite discontinuation of the
drugs and treatment with ion-exhange resins and i.v.
glucose and insulin (73). This combination with ACE
inhibitors is dangerous and should be avoided.

Spironolactone/aspirin

Administration of aspirin to healthy subjects taking
spironolactone caused substantial reductions in Na+
excretion (74) and the active metabolites (canrenone)
excretion (75). However, administration of therapeutic
doses of aspirin to hypertensive patients did not alter
the effects of spironolactone on blood pressure, serum
electrolytes, blood-urea nitrogen, or plasma renin
activity (76).

Spironolactone/digitoxin Spironolactone increased digitoxin half-life in normal
subjects from 141.6 to 192.2 hr. This interaction may
be harmful to digitoxin-intoxicated patients if they are
treated with spironolactone for diuresis with K+sparing effects. The combination should be used with
caution (77).
Spironolactone/digoxin

Spironolactone and its metabolites have been reported
to interfere with serum-digoxin determinations by
radio-immunoassay or fluorescence-polarisation
immunoassay resulting in falsely elevated
measurements (78-81). This interference is neither
consistent nor predictable and serum-digoxin
concentrations should be interpreted with caution
when the two drugs are given together, epecially since
spironolactone has also been reported to decrease
digoxin clearance by a median of 26% resulting in a
true increase in serum-digoxin concentrations (82).

Spironolactone/mitotane

Administration of the adrenocortical inhibitor,
mitotane (up to 3 gm daily) to a patient with Cushing’s
syndrome appeared to be ineffective and did not
produce the side effects usually associated with the
drug when the patient was also given spironolactone
(83). This combination should be avoided since it
negates the effect of mitotane.

Spironolactonelwarfarin

Spironolactone has been associated with a reduction in

DIURETICS

Combination

227

Interaction

warfarin’s activity in healthy subjects (84). It has been
suggested that this might be a consequence of the
diuresis concentrating the circulating clotting factors
(See also diuretic/anticoagulant entry above.)
Thiazide/
antihypertensive agent

Diuretics, particularly the thiazides, augment the
hypotensive effects of antihypertensive drugs (85). This
combination is common and valuable but the patient
should be watched for excessive hypotension.

Thiazide/calcium
carbonate

The milk-alkali syndrome (hypercalcaemia,metabolic
acidosis, renal failure) developed in a patient taking
chlorothiazide and moderately large doses of calcium
carbonate (85). Patients taking thiazides may be at an
increased risk of developing this syndrome due to their
reduced ability to excrete excess calcium.

Thiazide/cholestyramine, Gastrointestinal absorption of both chlorothiazide and
colestipol
hydrochlorothiazide is reduced by cholestyramine and
colestipol (86-88).
In a study in healthy subjects, cholestyramine
decreased hydrochlorothiazide absorption by 85%,
compared with 45% decrease with colestipol (87).
Thiazide/digoxin

Hydrochlorothiazide and other thiazide diuretics may
enhance the toxicity of digoxin and other digitalis
glycosides by depleting serum-potassium concentrations
(48, 49). This hypokalaemic effect may be enhanced by
corticosteroids, corticotrophin, &agonists
(salbutamol) or carbenoxolone (21, 89).

Thiazidelfenfluramine

In nine of 43 obese patients hydrochlorothiazide did
not lower blood pressure but raised the level of plasma
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) in all patients with
hypertension. Two to 5 weeks after adding
fenfluramine to the thiazide in the nine obese and
resistant patients, their blood pressures were reduced
and there were marked falls in plasma noradrenaline
concentrations (90). This may be a clinically useful
interaction.

ThiazideAithium

Thiazide diuretics produce sodium depletion by

228

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Thiazidehithium
cont.

inhibiting distal tubular sodium reabsorption. The
consequent increase in proximal tubular reabsorption
frequently results in an increase in plasma lithium
concentrations (22) with a risk of toxicity (24, 25).
(See also entry on diuretic/lithium interactions above.)

Thiazide/NSAID

Interaction between thiazides or loop diuretics and
NSAIDs may result in a reduction in the diuretic effect
(91). Frusemide may not be effective in low birth
weight infants receiving indomethacin (92), but
frusemide can prevent the decline in urine output
which occurs during indomethacin administration (93,
94).

Thiazidehkeletal muscle
relaxants

Thiazides and ethacrynic acid increase the
responsivenes to some skeletal muscle relaxants, an
effect that seems to be related to induced Kf
deficiency (95-97). Avoid K+-depletion prior to
elective surgery and if possible withold the diuretic.
Intensive preoperative electrolyte care is necessary to
ensure that K+ levels are normal (98).

Thiazidehricosuric
drugs

Thiazides frequently raise plasma levels of uric acid
(99); the mechanism is uncertain. Thiazides may
therefore disrupt the control of patients being treated
for gout with uricosuric drugs. An increase in the
uricosuric dosage (allopurinol, colchicine, probenecid,
sulphinpyrazone) may be necessary.

Triamterene/ACE
inhibitors

As with other potassium-sparing diuretics there is a
risk of hyperkalaemia if triamterene is taken in
association with ACE inhibitors (100). They should not
be given routinely with the diuretic.

Triamterene/amantadine

A patient with parkinsonism previously stabilized on
amantadine (300 mg daily), showed amantadine
toxicity symptoms (ataxia, myoclonus confusion) 7
days after starting treatment with triamterene and
hydrochlorothiazide; it was thought that this was due
to reduction of the tubular secretion of amantadine
(101).

DIURETICS

Combination

229

Interaction

Triamterene/digoxin

Triamterene in association with a thiazide or loop
diuretic increased the mean serum-digoxin
concentration; this interaction is thought to be of little
clinical importance except in patients with renal failure
(102).

Triamterene/lithium

Triamterene and the thiazide diuretics reduce the
excretion of lithium and may thus precipitate
intoxication (100).

Triamterene/NSAID

There have been reports of renal failure in patients
taking NSAIDs with triamterene (98, 103). Both types
of drugs are nephrotoxic and in combination their
effects are additive (104-106). It is thought that
suppression of urinary prostaglandins by NSAIDs
could potentiate the nephrotoxic effects of the diuretic
(98). NSAIDs may also antagonize the diuretic effect
of triamterene (91).

Triamterene/quinidine

Triamterene may interfere with the fluorescent
measurement of quinidine, and with some laboratory
tests of thyroid and parathyroid function and with the
bioassay of folic acid. Triamterene may cause a blue
fluorescence of the urine under certain light conditions
(100, 107).

REFERENCES

1 Boston Collaborative Drug Surveillance Program (1973) J A M A 205, 11.
2 Porter J, Jick H. (1977) Lancet i, 587.
3 Gomolin H, Garshick E. (1980) N Engl J Med 303, 702.
4 D’Arcy PF. (1986) In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP (eds) Iatrogenic diseases, 3rd edn, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp. 157-61.
5 Ward A, Heel RC. (1984) Drugs 28, 426.
6 Maher JF, Schreiner GE. (1965) Ann Intern Med 62, 15.
7 Russell RP, et al. (1968) J A M A 205,ll.
8 Cowley AJ, Elkeles RS. (1978) Lancet i, 154.
9 Crook JE, Nies AS. (1978) Drugs 15, 72.
10 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin (1972) 10, 25.
11 Sellers EM, Koch-Weser J. (1970) Clin Pharmacol Ther 11, 524.
12 Detilleux M et al. (1976) Presse Med 5, 2395.
13 Grand A et al. (1977) Nouv Presse Med 6, 2691.
14 McLain D et al. (1980) J A M A 243, 763.
15 Petrick RJ et al. (1975) J A M A 231, 843.
16 O’Reilly RA et al. (1971) Ann N Y Acad Sci 179, 173.

230

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

17 O’Reilly RA. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 27, 198.
18 Griffin JP. (1986) In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP (eds) Iatrogenic diseases, 3rd edn, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp. 321-48.
19 Hickman JW, Kirtley WR. (1968) J Indiana Med Assoc 61, 1114.
20 Cornish AL et al. (1961) N Engl J Med 265, 673.
21 Thorn GW. (1966) N Engl J Med 274, 775.
22 Beeley L. (1986) Prescribers J 26, 160.
23 Somogyi A. (1996) In: D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug
interactions, Springer, Berlin, pp. 173-212.
24 Jefferson JW, Kalin NH. (1979) J A M A 241, 1134.
25 Lott RS. (1983) Drug Interact News 3 , 17.
26 Ramsay LE. (1984) Prescriberís J 24, 60.
27 Symmons DPM et al. (1983) Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol 21, 350.
28 Ciabattoni G et al. (1980) Eur J Rheumatol InPam 3 , 210.
29 Kwan KC et al. (1977) Postgrad Med Commun (May) 13.
30 Patak RV et al. (1975) Prostaglandins 10, 649.
31 Allan SG et al. (1981) Br Med J 283, 1611.
32 Pedrinelli R et al. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 28, 722.
33 Watkins J et al. (1980) Br Med J 281, 702.
34 Eastell R , Edmonds CJ. (1984) Br Med J 289, 1658.
35 Hart TL et al. (1989) Canad J Hosp Pharm 42, 243.
36 Thomsen K, Schou M. (1968) Am J Physiol215, 823.
37 Milne MD. (1965) Proc R o y Soc Med 58, 961.
38 Knouss RF et al. (1968) Ann Intern Med 68, 1157.
39 Gerhardt RE et al. (1969) Ann Intern Med 7 1 , 927.
40 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 816.
41 Knauf H et al. (1985) Eur J Clin Pharmacol28, 61.
42 Spahn H et al. (1987) Eur J Clin Pharmacol33, 493.
43 Sabanathan K et al. (1987) Eur J Clin Pharmacol32, 53.
44 Ismail Z et al. (1989) Eur J Clin Pharmacol37, 167.
45 Waldorff S et al. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 30, 172.
46 Mathog RH, Klein WJ. (1969) N Engl J Med 280, 1223.
47 Johnson AH, Hamilton CH. (1970) South Med J 63, 511.
48 Shanks RG. (1979) In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP (eds) Iatrogenic diseases, 2nd edn, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp. 161-31.
49 Harris EA, et al. (1960) Br Med J 2 , 1409.
50 Black FO, Pesznecker RN. (1993) Otolaryngol Clin North Am 5 , 713.
51 Barclay ML, Begg EJ. (1994) Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 13, 207.
52 Ahmad S. (1974) Br Med J 3, 657.
53 Fine A et al. (1977) Br Med J 2 , 1061.
54 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoiea, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 871.
55 Yassa R et al. (1987) J Clin Psychiatry 48, 281.
56 Malach M, Berman N. (1975) J A M A 232, 638.
57 Pevonka MP et al. (1977) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 11, 332.
58 Dean RP et al. (1991) Clin Pharm 10, 385.
59 Lawson D H et al. (1982) J Clin Pharmacol22, 254.
60 Rawles JM. (1982) Scott Med 27, 37.
61 Honari J et al. (1977) Clin Pharmacol Ther 22, 395.
62 Odlind B, Beermann B. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 27, 784.
63 Smith DE et al. (1980) J Pharm Sci 69, 571.
64 Vree TB et al. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 692.

DIURETICS

23 1

65 Anon (1967) Med Lett 9 , 6.
66 Conlon PF et al. (1981) A m J Hosp Pharm 38, 1345.
67 Hogg KJ, Hillis WS. (1986) Lancet i, 501.
68 Christensen P, Leski M. (1987) Br Med J 294, 578.
69 British National Formulary (1996) No. 32, Chapter 2.2, British Medical Association and
The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London, p. 62.
70 George S et al. (1990) Eur J Clin Pharmacol38, 93.
71 Lo TCN, Cryer RJ. (1986) Br Med J 292, 1672.
72 lakhani M. (1986) Br Med J 293, 271.
73 Morton AR, Crook SA. (1987) Lancet ii, 1525.
74 Tweeddale MG, Ogilvie RI. (1973) N Engl J Med 289, 198.
75 Ramsay LE et al. (1976) Eur J Clin Pharmacol 10, 43.
76 Hollifield JW. (1976) South Med J 69, 1034.
77 Carruthers SC, Dujovne CA. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 27, 184.
78 Paladin0 JA et al. (1984) J A M A 251, 470.
79 Foukaridis GN. (1990) Ther Drug Monit 12, 82.
80 Horn JM. (1982) Drug Znterac News 2, 51.
81 Yosselson-Superstine S. (1984) Clin Pharmacokinet 9, 67.
82 Waldorff S et al. (1978) Clin Pharmacol Ther 24, 162.
83 Wortsman J, Soler NG. (1977) J A M A 238, 2527.
84 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin (1967) 5, 89.
85 Gora ML et al. (1989) Clin Pharm 8, 227.
86 Kauffman RE, Azarnoff DL. (1973) Clin Pharmacol Ther 14, 886.
87 Hunninghake DB et al. (1982) Znt J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxic0120, 151.
88 Hunninghake DB, Hibbard DM. (1986) Clin Pharmacol Ther 39.
89 Reynolds JEF. (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 889.
90 Lake CR et al. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 28, 22.
91 Webster J. (1985) Drugs 30, 32.
92 Friedman Z et al. (1978) J Pediatr 93, 512.
93 Yeh TF et al. (1982) J Pediatr 101, 433.
94 Nahata MC et al. (1988) Infusion 12, 11.
95 Goddard JE, Phillips OC. (1965) Pa Med 68, 48.
96 Sphire RD. (1964) Anesth Analg Curr Res 43, 690.
97 Feldman SA et al. (1963) Br J Anaesth 35, 546.
98 Favre L et al. (1982) A n n Intern Med 96, 317.
99 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia,3lst edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p . 887.
100 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1991-2) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
251, 1455.
101 Wilson TW, Rajput AH. (1983) Can Med Assoc J 129, 974.
102 Impivaara 0, Tisalo E . (1985) Eur J Clin Pharmacol 27, 627.
103 Harkonen M, Ekblom-Kullberg S. (1986) Br Med J 293, 698.
104 Bailey RR. (1988) Adverse Drug React Bull 131, 492.
105 Lynn KL, et al. (1985) N 2 Med J 98, 629.
106 Sica DA, Gehr TWB. (1989) Nephron 51, 454.
107 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 958.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 3
Drug Interactions with Agents Used in
Respiratory Disease

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

3.1. INTERACTIONS WITH
SYMPATHOMIMETIC AMINES

I. SYMPATHETIC AMINES USED IN THE TREATMENT OF ASTHMA
1. Selective &Adrenoceptor Stimulants
Salbutamol: available in oral, injection and inhalation formulations
Terbutaline: available in oral, injection and inhalation formulations
Bambuterol: bambuterol is a prodrug of terbutaline and is available as an oral
formulation
Fenoterol hydrobromide: available as inhalation formulations only
Pirbuterol: available as oral and inhalation formulations
Reproterol: available as inhalation formulation only
Rimiterol hydrobromide: available as inhalation formulation only
Salmeterol: salmeterol is an exceedingly long acting selective P2-stimulant. It is not
intended for immediate relief of acute bronchoconstriction. It is intended for patients needing long-term bronchodilator therapy. Adequate levels of inhaled corticosteroids will normally be co-prescribed. Salmeterol is available as a pressurized
aerosol and a dry powder for inhalation.
Tulobuterol: available as oral preparations only

Side effects of selective &-stimulants
Fine tremor, nervous tension, headache, palpitations, hypokalaemia, paradoxical
bronchospasm, urticaria and angioneurotic oedema.

2. Other Non-selective Adrenoceptor Stimulants Used for Treatment of Bronchoconstriction
Adrenaline hydrochloride and acid tartrate: injections
Ephedrine hydrochloride and sulphate: oral formulations only
Isoetharine hydrochloride: available as oral formulations
Isoprenaline hydrochloride and sulphate: available as inhalation formulations only
Orciprenaline sulphate: available in oral and inhalation formulations
These preparations are now regarded as less suitable and less safe for use as
bronchodilators than selective P2-adrenergic stimulants as they are more likely to

235

236

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

cause cardiac arrhythmias and other side effects. They should be avoided whenever
possible (BNF, 1995).

11. NON-SELECTIVE ADRENOCEPTOR STIMULANTS USED IN CONDITIONS
OTHER THAN BRONCHOCONSTRICTION
1. Cardiotropic Uses of Sympathomimetic Amine
Adrenaline and its salts
Isoprenaline and its salts
Dopamine
Dopexamine

2. Nasal Decongestants
Ephedrine and its salts
Hydroxyamphetamine hydrobromide
Methoxamine hydrochloride
Naphazoline hydrochloride and nitrate
Oxymetazoline hydrochloride
Phenylephrine hydrochloride
Phenylpropanolamine hydrochloride
Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride
Tetrahydrazoline hydrochloride
Xylometazoline hydrochloride

3. Hypertensive Agent
Angiotensin amide
Mephentermine sulphate
Metaraminol tartrate
Methoxamine hydrochloride
Noradrenaline acid tartrate
Oxedrine tartrate

4. Uterine Relaxation

Isoxsuprine hydrochloride
Ritodrine hydrochloride
Both these preparations are used as uterine muscle relaxants in the treatment of
premature labour and are P-sympathomimetic agents.

INTERACTIONS WITH SYMPATHOMIMETIC AMINES

237

5. Ophthalmic Preparations
Adrenaline hydrochloride
Phenylephrine hydrochloride
6. Sympathomimetic Amines that have been Used for Weight Reduction
Amphetamine
Dexamphetamine
Diethyl propion
Fenfluramine
Dexfenfluramine
Phenylpropanolamine hydrochloride
Phentermine

7. Drugs of Abuse
Ecstasy: an amphetamine derivative
These centrally acting appetite suppressants are of no real value in the treatment
of obesity. They are all sympathomimetic amines and, with the exception of fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine, have pronounced stimulant effects on the central nervous system. Benefits are outweighed by the risks, and abuse is a continuing
problem.
GENERAL COMMENTS
Interaction with Antidepressants
All sympathomimetic amines are contraindicated in patients receiving MA01 or
tricyclic antidepressants.
Sudden Death in Asthma
Excessive use of aerosols containing sympathomimetic amines has been associated
with sudden death in asthmatic, particularly young asthmatic, patients. This is
thought to be due to the fact that some asthmatics become refractory to the actions
of sympathomimetic amines as their condition deteriorates. In these circumstances
cardiac effects of the sympathomimetic amines and the CFC propellants are accentuated in the presence of hypoxia (1).
The problem of inhalation toxicity studies on both drug and propellant therefore
became pertinent since it was no longer possible to regard the propellants as being
inert; they were fully capable of sensitizing the myocardium to some, but not all,
sympathomimetic amines.
A study by Aviado and Belej (2) tested 15 different propellants used most widely
and classified them into three groups:

238

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Class I : Propellants that induced arrhythmia when given alone and also sensitized
the heart to adrenaline-induced arrhythmia. This group includes trichlorofluoromethane (propellant 11), trichlorotrifluoromethane (propellant 113), (propellant 21),
vinyl chloride, methylene chloride and trichloroethane.
Class ZZ: Propellants that had no effect alone but sensitized the heart to adrenalineinduced arrhythmia, and this group includes propane, isobutane, dichlorotetrafluoromethane (propellant 114), octafluorocyclomethane (propellant 12).
Class ZZZ: Propellants that neither caused arrhythmia nor sensitized the heart to
adrenaline-induced arrhythmia. This group includes monochlorodifluoroethane
(propellant 142b) and dichlorodifluoromethane (propellant 12).
Fluorocarbon 11, which was the most cardiotoxic in this study on the mouse heart,
causing second- or third-degree heart block at 10% v/v, is also the most common
propellant in pressurized aerosols used in asthma. (The cardiotoxic effect of propellant 11 could not be blocked by atropine, propranolol or sotalol showing that the
effect is mediated by neither cholinergic nor P-adrenergic receptors.)
The potential interaction between sympathomimetic amines and CFC (Freon
propellants) will be obviated by the reformulation for environmental reasons of
pressurized aerosol formulations to eliminate CFC.
It is now believed that sudden asthma deaths are predominantly a result of
underusage of steroids rather than overuse of sympathomimetic amines. In severe
asthmatics regularly inhaled steroids should be routine, with or without a sustained
release formulation of theophylline, Sympathomimetic amines used should be short
acting selective &-stimulants and these should be used as rescue treatment for an
acute episode of bronchoconstriction against a background of continuous inhaled
and/or oral steroid therapy depending on the severity of the asthma.
Urinary Retention in the Elderly
Sympathomimetic agents, particularly the non-selective agents may cause urinary
retention in elderly males. This is largely due to a-adrenergic effects. (Selective aadrenergic blockers, alfuzosin, indoramin, prazosin and terazosin, relax smooth
muscle in the neck of the bladder in benign prostatic hyperplasia producing an
increased flow and an improvement in obstructive symptoms).
Corn b ina tion

Anaestheticdadrenaline,
isoprenaline (3, 4)

Interaction

A risk of arrhythmias exists if adrenaline or
isoprenaline is given with volatile anaesthetics.

ANTIDEPRESSANTS/SYMPATHOMIMETICAMINES
MAOI/dopamine (5)

Patients who have been treated with M A 0 1 prior to

INTERACTIONS WITH SYMPATHOMIMETIC AMINES

Combination

239

Interaction

administration of dopamine should receive
substantially reduced dosage of dopamine. The starting
dose in such patients should be reduced to one tenth
(1110) of the usual dose.
MAOI/dopexamine (6)

Dopexamine is contraindicated in patients receiving
MA01

MAOIhoradrenaline
( 7 , 8)

This interaction may produce a hypertensive crisis.
However, noradrenaline is very rapidly taken up from
circulation by adrenergic nerves and is inactivated by
COMT enzyme, Therefore since monamine oxidase is
probably little involved in this metabolism, the
interaction is less likely than with other
sympathomimetic amines which rely upon monoamine
oxidase for their inactivation.
Although noradrenaline is less likely to induce a
hypertensive episode in patients receiving MA01
antidepressants than other sympathomimetic drugs, the
risk is still present. Thus it would be wise to adhere to
the general contraindication of all sympathomimetics in
patients receiving such antidepressants.

MAOI/
phenylpropanolamine
(9-12)

Hypertensive crises with fatal episodes have been
reported with this interaction.
Phenylpropanolamine is a common ingredient of many
proprietary remedies designed to alleviate symptoms of
the common cold, hay fever and rhinitis, etc.
This combination is dangerous; phenylpropanolamine
should not be given to patients being treated with a
MA01 antidepressant or within 2 weeks of stopping
such treatment.
The UK government has (January 1984) proposed that
all medicinal products containing phenylpropanolamine
will be available only on prescription except where
products are indicated for the relief of cough, colds
and hay fever, with a recommended maximum daily
dose of not more than 75 mg. The maximum permitted
strength of nasal sprays and nasal drops will remain at

240

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

MA011
phenylpropanolamine
cont.
MAOI/phenylephrine
(13)

Interaction

2.0%. Phenylpropanolamine-containing slimming aids
are still available, however, with little restriction in
America and Australia.
This combination may give rise to severe hypertensive
crises. Phenylephrine is a common ingredient of many
proprietary remedies (including non-prescription
items) designed to alleviate symptoms of the common
cold, hay fever, rhinitis etc.
This combination is potentially dangerous and patients
on M A 0 1 treatment for depression should be warned
of the dangers of using proprietary ‘cold cures’, nasal
drops, etc. Patients should seek medical or
pharmaceutical advice before such self-medication is
commenced to ensure that phenylephrine or other
sympathomimetic is absent from the formulation.

MA011
sympathomimetic agents
used in the treatment of
obesity (3)

MAOIs used in combination of the following
sympathomimetic agents used in the treatment of
obesity has resulted in hypertensive crises:
amphetamine
dexamphet amine
dexfenfluramine
diethyl propion
fenfluramine
phentermine
phen ylpropanolamine

MA011
sympathomimetic
amines used in nasal
decongestants (3)

All the list of sympathomimetic amines used in nasal
decongestants can cause hypertensive crises when
given to patients on M A 0 1 inhibitors.

Tricyclic
antidepressants1
sympathomimetic
amines (13-19)

These antidepressants inhibit the uptake of
noradrenaline by sympathetic neurones and this
mechanism may be responsible for the increased
cardiovascular actions of noradrenaline and the
potentiation of noradrenaline toxicity.

INTERACTIONS WITH SYMPATHOMIMETIC AMINES

Combination

241

Interaction

This type of combination is absolutely contraindicated,
as is the concomitant use of tricyclic compounds with
adrenaline or any other sympathomimetic amine.
Tricyclic antidepressant/
isoprenaline (14)

Imipramine potentiates the action of isoprenaline. The
administration of imipramine (25 mg tid) to 10 chronic
asthmatic patients using isoprenaline aerosols gave
subjective improvement and increased peak expiratory
flow. Cardiovascular responses to isoprenaline were
also potentiated.
Although the bronchodilator action of isoprenaline was
enhanced, its cardiovascular effects were also
potentiated, and could be potentially hazardous since
tricyclic agents themselves cause cardiac arrhythmias.
Patients on such a combination of treatments should
be carefully observed for cardiovascular effects such as
tachycardia and arrhythmias.

Tricyclic
antidepressantdlocal
anaesthetics containing
noradrenaline
(7, 8, 18, 31)

Fifteen cases of hypertensive episodes, one fatal, have
been reported (32) in which local anaesthetic
preparations containing high doses of noradrenaline (1
in 25 000 = 0.00004 g/ml) were used in dental
anaesthesia. Six of these patients had been
concurrently receiving treatment with tricyclic
antidepressants (imipramine, desipramine, nortriptyline
or protriptyline).
The use of local anaesthetic formulations containing
either of these vasoconstrictor agents is best avoided in
patients on tricyclic antidepressants.

Corticosteroids/
selective
&-syrnpathomimetic
amines (32)

There is a risk of hypokalaemia if high doses of
corticosteroids are given with high doses of any of the
following:
bambuterol
fenoterol
pirbuterol
reproterol
rimiterol
ritodrine
salbutamol
salmeterol

242

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Corticosteroidd
Selective
&sympathomimetic
amines cont.

terbutaline
tulobuterol
Plasma potassium levels should be routinely monitored
in severe asthmatics.

Diureticdselective
&-sympathomimetic
amines (32)

There is a risk of enhanced hypokalaemia if high doses
of
bambuterol
fenoterol
pirbuterol
reproterol
rimiterol
ritodrine
salbutamol
salmeterol
terbutaline
tolbutaline
tulobuterol
are given to patients on diuretics which are not
potassium sparing.
Plasma potassium levels should be routinely monitored
in severe asthmatics.

Ergot alkaloids/
sympathomimetic
amines (33)

The vasoconstrictor effects of ergot are enhanced, by
sympathomimetic agents. Ergotamine has marked
direct vasoconstrictor effects. The hydrogenation of
alkaloids (e .g. dihydroergotamine and co-dergocrine
(dihydro-ergotoxine) enhances their a-adrenergic
blocking activity and diminishes their direct
vasoconstrictor effects; thus these hydrogenated
alkaloids will block the a-adrenergic effect of
sympathomimetics.
This type of combination should only be used with
caution and with full knowledge of the
pharmacological nature of the interaction which,
dependent upon the alkaloid, can vary from enhanced
through diminished to reversed vasoconstrictor effects.
Ergometrine has been used as a provocation test for
the variant of angina known as Prinzmetal’s angina. In
patients with Prinzmetal’s angina the classic response

INTERACTIONS WITH SYMPATHOMIMETIC AMINES

Combination

243

Interaction

consists of coronary arterial spasm accompanied by ST
segment elevation on the ECG. Dose-related nausea,
chest pain, and arrhythmias may occur and fatalities
have been reported.
Fatalities are more common in the presence of raised
levels of endogenous sympathomimetic amines or
exogenous sympathomimetic amines.
Insulin/
sympathomimetic
amines
e.g. ritodrine (33)

Ritodrine given by i.v. infusion to an insulindependent diabetic to delay contractions in preterm
labour caused hyperglycaemia (21.5 mmol/l) and
ketoacidosis. She delivered a stillborn baby.
Avoid this combination; as diabetics do not have an
adequate insulin response to handle p-adrenergicinduced hyperglycaemia, metabolic acidosis may occur
and this could lead to fetal death.

Ipratropiumhalbutamol
(29)

Shah et al. (29) have reported five cases of patients
(aged 68-75 years) who developed acute angle closure
glaucoma when they received both ipratropium and
salbutamol as bronchodilators. The times between
starting the nebulized therapy and the onset of
symptoms ranged from 1hr to an extreme of 9 days.
The anticholinergic action of ipratropium caused pupil
dilatation which blocked the flow of aqueous humour
from the posterior to the anterior chamber of the eye
which resulted in the peripheral iris bowing anteriorly
and obstructing the drainage angle. Salbutamol
compounded this problem by increasing the production
of aqueous humour,

Theophylline/selective
&-sympathomimetic
amines (30, 32)

There is an increased risk of hypokalaemia if
theophylline is given with high doses of any of the
following:
bambuterol
fenoterol
pirbuterol
reproterol
rimiterol
ritodrine

244

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Theophylline/selective
&-sympathomimetic
amines cont.

salbutamol
salmeterol
terbutaline
tulobuterol
Plasma potassium levels should be routinely monitored
in severe asthmatics.

a-Adrenergic blocking
agentdsympathomimetic
amine bronchodilators
(35, 36)

Indoramin and thymoxamine a-adrenergic blocking
agents potentiate the bronchodilator effects of
sympathomimetic amines.

REFERENCES

1 Taylor GJ, Harris WS. (1970) J A M A 214, 81.
2 Aviado DM, Belej MA. (1974) Toxicology 2 , 31.
3 British National Formulary (1995) Number 29, Appendix 1, British Medical Association
and The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain.
4 Buzik SC. (1990) Canad Pharm J 23, 68.
5 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium (1995-96) Data Pharm publications Ltd, London, p. 1
(dopamine).
6 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium (1995-96) Data Pharm publications Ltd, London, pp.
1753-55 (dopexamine).
7 Goldberg LI. (1964) J A M A 190, 456.
8 Elis J et al. (1967) Br Med J 2 , 75.
9 Tonks CM, Lloyd AT. (1965) Br Med J 1, 589.
10 Cuthbert MF et al. (1969) Br Med J 1, 404.
11 Mason AMS, Buckle RM. (1969) Br Med J 1 , 845.
12 Humberstone PM. (1969) Br Med J 1, 846.
13 Stone CA et al. (1964) J Pharmacol Exp Ther 144, 196.
14 Mattila AJ, Muittari A. (1969) A n n Med Intern Fenn 57, 185.
15 Gillette JR. (1965) A n n N Y Acad Sci 123, 42.
16 Jori A et al. (1969) J Pharm Pharmacol 18, 824.
17 Jori A. (1969) J Pharm Pharmacol20, 862.
18 Barar FSK et al. (1971) Br J Pharmacol43 472P.
19 Boakes AJ et al. (1972) Br Dent J (1972)123, 137.
20 Leading Article (1972) Lancet ii, 584.
21 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1993) Martindale The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th Ed, pp. 12491250.
22 Middleton E, Finke SR. (1968) J Allergy 42, 288.
23 Pate1 JA, Phillips GL. (1966) Am J Hosp Pharm 23, 409.
24 Mark LC et al. (1967) N Y J Med 67, 570.
25 Gulati OD et al. (1966) Clin Pharmacol Ther 7 , 510.
26 Day MD, Rand MJ. (1962) Lancet ii, 1282.
27 Sneddon JM, Turner P. (1964) Arch Ophthalmol81, 622.
28 Prime FG et al. (1972) Bull Physiopathol Respir (Nancy) 8, 99.
29 Shah P et al. (1992) Br Med J 304, 40.
30 Van de Vet APH. (1986) Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol24, 569.

INTERACTIONS WITH SYMPATHOMIMETIC AMINES

245

31 MacDonald AG et al. (1967) B r J Anaesthesiol 39, 919.
32 Committee on Safety of Medicines - Warning reproduced from British National Formulary, 1996, No. 31, Chapter 3, p. 116 et seq.
33 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1993) Martindale The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th Edn, p. 1365.
34 Schilthuis MS, Aarnoudse JG. (1980) Lancet i, 1145.
35 Bianco S et al. (1974) B r Med J 4, 18.
36 Griffin JP et al. (1972) Lancet ii, 1288.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

3.2. INTERACTIONS WITH
THEOPHYLLINE AND DERIVATIVES
Theophylline hydrate
Theophylline monoethanolamine
Theophylline sodium glycinate
Acepifylline
Aminophylline
Choline theophyllinate
Diprophylline
Etofylline
Since its recognition as a bronchodilator almost 50 years ago, theophylline, a
methylxanthine alkaloid, has become a cornerstone in the management of both the
acute and chronic phases of reversible airway obstruction. The drug also has proven
efficacy in the management of apnoea in preterm infants. The drug, however, has
a narrow therapeutic range that, along with its variability in disposition, makes
dosing difficult to predict and toxicity difficult to prevent. Because of its narrow
therapeutic range (10-20 pg/ml), theophylline is potentially fatal in children and
adults if not administered with proper dose titration guided by plasma theophylline
measurements. Symptoms of toxicity include tachycardia, severe restlessness, agitation, vomiting, headache and convulsions. The physical status of the patient can
greatly alter theophylline metabolism and/or elimination, resulting in toxic plasma
levels. After single doses of theophylline, significant decreases in plasma clearance
and prolongation of plasma elimination half-life have been observed in patients
with liver disease (acute hepatitis, cholestasis, cirrhosis) and acute pulmonary oedema/congestive heart failure.
Due to its narrow therapeutic range, theophylline is particularly prone to clinically
significant interactions with other drugs.
Aminophylline is a mixture of theophylline and ethylenediamine which releases
the active drug in the body; it can be regarded as a soluble derivative of theophylline;
1.27 g of aminophylline is approximately equivalent in theophylline content to 1g
of theophylline. Acepifylline (piperazine theophylline ethanoate) , diprophylline
(dyphylline, dihydroxypropyltheophylline) and etofylline (hydroxyethyltheophylline) are also soluble derivatives of theophylline. All these derivatives have the
actions and uses of theophylline.
Although theophylline has been used as a bronchodilator for more than 50 years,
recent studies have indicated that theophylline has an anti-inflammatory action

247

248

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

which emerges at serum concentrations below those required to produce bronchodilation, and also below the levels associated with adverse effects such as arrhythmias,
tachycardia, palpitations, nausea, gastrointestinal disturbance, headache, sleep disturbances, convulsions, etc. If low doses of theophylline are used then the tedious
business of monitoring plasma levels, particularly for those in primary care can be
avoided. The new role for theophylline may be regarded as steroid sparing.
Theophylline in this new role may become a first line anti-inflammatory therapy
in asthma alongside steroids and cromoglycate.

Theophylline Modified Release
The Council of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain advises pharmacists that if a general practitioner prescribes a modified release theophylline without
specifying a particular formulation, the doctor should be contacted and a formulation decided upon.
Patients should be maintained on the same brand on which they have been
stabilized.

Allergy to Ethylenediamine
Allergy to ethylenediamine can cause urticaria, erythema and exfoliative dermatitis,
and even fatal anaphylaxis.
Combination

Interaction

Anaesthetics/theophylline
Increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias when halothane
Halothane (1, 2)
is given to patients on theophylline.
Ketamine (3)

Anthelminthicd
theophylline
Thiabendazole
(1, 4-81

Extensor-type seizures have been described in four
patients receiving theophylline after induction of
anaesthesia with ketamine.
It is suggested that anticonvulsant premedication be
given to patients receiving theophylline or,
alternatively, that ketamine be avoided in these
patients.

Thiabendazole increases theophylline concentration
due to reduced hepatic metabolism of theophylline. It
has been recommended that theophylline dosage
should be reduced by 50% when thiabedazole therapy
is started.

INTERACTIONS WITH THEOPHYLLINE AND DERIVATIVES

Combination

Anthelminthicd
aminophylline (7)

249

Interaction

Treatment of a patient on aminophylline infusion with
thiabendazole for Strongyloides infection caused serum
levels of theophylline to rise from 21 to 46 p,g/ml. The
likely mechanism of this interaction is inhibition of the
liver metabolism of theophylline.

Anti-arrhythmicd
theophylline
Amiodarone (9)
Mexiletine (1, 10-15)
Propafenone (16)
Tocainide (17)

Amiodarone, mexiletine , propafenone and tocainide
increase plasma theophylline concentration and may
produce symptoms of theophylline toxicity
(tachydardia, nervousness, tremors).

Antibacterials/
theophylline
Clarithromycin
(1, 4-6)

Plasma theophylline concentrations are increased by
clarithromycin.

Erythromycin
(4, 18-28)

The effect of erythromycin on theophylline kinetics is
controversial. Three studies in normal subjects have
found no significant interaction between oral
erythromycin and theophylline (18-20). However, one
study in asthmatic children (21), one study in an adult
patient with obstructive lung disease (22), and five
studies in normal subjects (23-27) have shown that an
interaction does occur and that erythromycin interferes
with the disposition of theophylline, although the
magnitude of the interaction is variable.
In view of this divergence of opinion, and the absence
of controlled studies on patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and/or cor pulmonale, it
would be prudent to assume that an interaction might
occur. Precautions should therefore be taken to keep
theophylline serum concentrations at the lower end of
the therapeutic range (i.e. 8-115 kg/ml), and to
monitor the patient for clinical signs of toxicity.
Reliance can then be placed on bronchodilator
combinations when more vigorous bronchodilation is
required (28).

Isoniazid (29-31)

Oral dosage of isoniazid (300 mg) for six consecutive
nights increased mean oral theophylline clearance by

250

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

Isoniazid cont.

Interaction

16% in four healthy, non-smoking, male subjects. No
consistent differences were noted in maximal plasma
concentration, time of maximal plasma concentration,
elimination half-life, absorption rate constant,
elimination rate constant, area under the curve, or
apparent volume of distribution. Although isoniazid is
a well-documented inhibitor of the metabolism of
many drugs, its effect on theophylline in this study
appeared to be one of increased metabolism by either
enzyme induction or an unknown mechanism (29).
More recent studies have shown that isoniazid inhibits
oxidative enzymes in the liver and has been found to
impair the elimination of theophylline. Both clearance
and volume of distribution of theophylline were
reduced with an increase in serum theophylline
concentrations in healthy subjects after 14 days’
pretreatment with isoniazid (30), and theophylline
toxicity has been reported in a patient 1 month after
adding theophylline to isoniazid therapy (31).

Penicillins
e .g . amoxycillin (51)

This combination is frequently prescribed. A study of
the effect of amoxycillin (750mg tds) on the
pharmacokinetics of theophylline showed no effect.

Quinolones
e.g.
ciprofloxacin
enoxacin
nalidixic acid
norfloxacin
perfloxacin
pipemidic acid
(1, 4-6, 32-50)

The fluoroquinolone antibiotics vary in their ability to
interact with theophylline. The mechanism of
interaction involves a reduction in the metabolic
clearance of theophylline due to inhibition of hepatic
microsomal enzymes. Enoxacin shows the strongest
interaction and has been reported to cause serious
nausea and vomiting, tachycardia and headaches
associated with unexpectedly high plasma theophylline
concentrations (32). Studies mainly in healthy subjects
have found that enoxacin decreases theophylline
clearance by up to 74% with an increase in the
elimination half-life and plasma theophylline
concentration (33-36). It has been recommended that
the theophylline dosage be halved when enoxacin is
started and that plasma theophylline levels be
monitored.

INTERACTIONS WITH THEOPHYLLINE AND DERIVATIVES

Combination

25 1

Interaction

Ciprofloxacin (33, 37-39) and perfloxacin (33) interact
with theophylline to a lesser extent than enoxacin,
decreasing theophylline clearance by about 30%. Eight
clinically important interactions between ciprofloxacin
and theophylline have been reported by the
Committee on Safety of Medicines, including one
death, and it is recommended that ciprofloxacin should
not be used in patients treated with theophylline (40).
A ciprofloxacin-induced seizure has been reported
which may have been due to the combined inhibitory
effect of the two drugs on GABA binding (41).
Norfloxacin (35, 42-44) and floxacin (35, 42, 45) have
been reported to have minor effects on the
pharmacokinetics of theophylline, although the
American FDA has received reports of theophylline
toxicity associated with concomitant norfloxacin
administration including one death (46).
Fleroxacin (47) and lomefloxacin (39, 48) appear to
have no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of
theophylline, but cinafloxacin has been reported to
increase theophylline serum concentration in an elderly
patient (50).
Of the non-fluorinated quinolones, nalidixic acid does
not affect theophylline clearance (33), while pipemidic
acid markedly inhibits theophylline clearance (49).
Rifampicin (1, 4, 30,
31, 52-56)

Plasma theophylline concentrations are reduced by
rifampicin due to increased hepatic clearance of
theophylline. This interaction is sufficient to cause loss
of clinical effect in some patients.

Tetracyclines (57-59)

Tetracycline weakly inhibits theophylline clearance; it
has been reported to cause theophylline toxicity in one
patient. Doxycycline has no sigificant effect on
theophylline pharmacokinetics in health subjects.

Troleandomycin (60)

The macrolide antibiotic, troleandomycin, has been
associated with decreased theophylline clearance.
Clearance was decreased by 50% in eight patients who
received troleandomycin (250 mg quid for at least 10
days). Serum concentrations of theophylline doubled in
one patient. The mechanism of this interaction is likely

252

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

Interaction

Troleandomycin cont.

to be a decreased hepatic uptake or altered enzymatic
degradation in the liver.
Caution is needed if these two drugs are to be used in
combination. Reduction in theophylline dosage during
the period of antibiotic administration may be
required. The patient should be monitored for signs of
theophylline toxicity.
Troleandomycin has been reported to cause jaundice.

Anti-depressants/
theophylline
Selective serotonin
re-uptake inhibitors
Fluvoxamine (1, 4, 19,
62, 63, 65-70)
Viloxazine (1, 64, 65)

Plasma theophylline concentrations are increased by
the SSRI antidepressants fluvoxamine and viloxazine.
This is due to reduced hepatic metabolism of
theophylline. Fluvoxamine is a potent inhibitor of the
P450 isoform CYP1A2 (63). Theophylline toxicity due
to this interaction has been reported.

Antiepilepticd
theophylline
Carbamazepine
(1, 4-6, 81)
Phenobarbitone
(1, 71-75)
Primidone

These antiepileptic agents all increase hepatic
clearance of theophylline due to enzyme P450
induction. (All barbiturates increase the rate of hepatic
breakdown of theophylline due to enzyme induction.)

Phenytoin (76-81)

Pharmacokinetic studies in an asthmatic patient and in
normal subjects showed that doses of phenytoin that
gave plasma concentrations in the therapeutic range
decreased the half-life of theophylline (mean 10.15.2 hr) and increased its clearance approximately twofold. Phenytoin-induced hepatic enzyme induction is
the likely mechanism of this interaction (79).
It has also been shown in normal subjects that
concomitant administration of theophylline and
phenytoin reduced the absorption of the phenytoin
dosage. Phenytoin area under the curve values were
decreased by 21% (80).
The combined administration of theophylline with

INTERACTIONS WITH THEOPHYLLINE AND DERIVATIVES

Combination

253

Interaction

phenytoin in patients previously stabilized on
phenytoin could lead to poor seizure control.
Antifungaldtheophylline
fluconazole (1, 82, 83)

BCG/theophylline
(84-85)

P-Adrenergic blocking
agentdtheophylline (8691)

Plasma theophylline concentrations increased by
fluconazole with increased risk of theophylline toxicity.
In a placebo controlled trial of administration of
fluconazole 200 mg for 14 days, theophylline clearance
was reduced by 18% (82).

BCG has been shown to impair the capacity of the
liver to eliminate theophylline. There is therefore a
possibility of transient rise in theophylline levels
following BCG.
Propranolol (40 mg orally every 6 hr) significantly
decreased theophylline clearance by a mean of 37%.
This effect was more marked in smokers, in whom the
metabolism of theophylline may already be induced
(87, 88).
Metoprolol (50 mg orally every 6 hr), the more likely
agent to be used in asthmatic patients because of its
cardioselectivity, did not significantly decrease the
clearance of theophylline. However, there did appear
to be an effect in some smokers whose initial clearance
was high (87). The less lipophilic /3-adrenergic blockers
atenolol (90, 91) and nadolol (91) have no significant
effect on the pharmacokinetics of theophylline.
The mechanisms of these interactions are not clear but
theophylline metabolism may, at least in part, depend
on stimulation of &receptors, which would be
blocked more completely by propranolol than
metoprolol (87). This could be due to effects on firstpass hepatic metabolism due to altered splanchnic
blood flow.
Propranolol and other non-selective P-adrenergic
blockers should not be used in asthmatic subjects who
require bronchodilation. However, a decreased dose of

254

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

/3-Adrenergic blocking
agentdtheophylline
cont.

theophylline may be required in patients who smoke if
treatment with metoprolol is initiated (86).

Calcium channel
blockerdtheophylline
(92-101)

Verapamil has been reported to decrease the clearance
of theophylline by a mean of 14% in healthy subjects
(92) and, although this was not considered to be
clinically significant, symptoms of theophylline toxicity
associated with near doubling of the serumtheophylline concentrations occurred in a 76-year-old
woman taking theophylline after 6 days of therapy with
verapamil (93).
Studies in healthy subjects and asthmatics have
produced conflicting results on the effect of nifedipine
on the pharmacokinetics of theophylline. Reduced
clearance (92) and an increase in the volume of
distribution (94, 95) of theophylline have been
reported, and both decreased and increased (96)
theophylline concentrations; theophylline toxicity has
been reported (97, 98). However, most studies have
concluded that the effects of nifedipine are unlikely to
be of clinical importance. Diltiazem has been reported
to cause an increase (96, 101) and felodipine a
decrease (100) in serum theophylline concentration,
neither of which were considered to be clinically
significant.

Disulfiram/theophylline
(1, 102)

Disulfiram increases theophylline concentrations due to
hepatic enzyme inhibition, and may cause theophylline
toxicity.
Avoid combination.

Diureticdtheophylline
(4)

Risk of hypokalaemia can be potentiated when
xanthines and diuretics are given concurrently.

Interferondtheophylline
(1, 103-106)

Plasma-theophylline concentration is increased by
interferon a.

Lithium/theophylline (1,
4, 107)

Theophylline increases the renal excretion of lithium
leading to reduced plasma lithium levels and reduced
control of manic depression.

INTERACTIONS WITH THEOPHYLLINE AND DERIVATIVES

255

Combination

Interaction

Lomustine/theophylline
(108)

In one case, the combination of theophylline and
lomustine accelerated the leukopenia and
thrombocytopenia common with this nitrosourea agent.
Theophylline-induced phosphodiesterase inhibition in
platelets increases intracellular cyclic AMP levels and
may inhibit platelet function.

Oncologists should be alert to the possibility of
augmented myelotoxicity and thrombopathia with this
combination.

Smoking/theophylline
(109-1 15)

Polycyclic hydrocarbons, such as those in cigarette
smoke, are inducers of microsomal enzyme systems. It
is established that cigarette smoking affects the
disposition of theophylline, and that a patient’s
smoking status is an important consideration when
selecting theophylline dosage (109-112). For example,
theophylline clearance was significantly greater by 66%
in smokers (0.0531 hr/kg) than in non-smokers
(0.0321 hr/kg); clearance of theophylline metabolite
was higher in smokers than in control subjects by
almost two-fold (113). Results suggest that cigarette
smoking induces both of the cytochrome P450mediated pathways of theophylline metabolism,
although N-demethylation may be increased to a
greater extent than 8-hydroxylation (113).

Cigarette smoking significantly enhances the
elimination of theophylline and this may be one of the
factors that produces interindividual variability in
theophylline clearance (114-115). In theory,
therefore, a sustained-release preparation of
theophylline would be more appropriate for patients
who smoke so as to avoid excessive fluctuation in
theophylline concentrations in the blood. The best
advice, however, to offer the patient on theophylline is
to stop smoking.

256

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Steroid
hormonedtheophylline
hydrocortisone (116)

Three patients (116) in status asthmaticus were given
a standard loading dose, then a constant infusion of
theophylline until stable theophylline concentrations
were attained (10-20 p,g/ml).
Hydrocortisone (500 mg i.v. bolus then 6 hr later, three
times 2-hourly 200-mg doses) caused a rapid elevation
of theophylline concentrations to between 40 and
50 mg/ml with theophylline toxicity in two of the
patients. No change in serum theophylline
concentrations was seen in another theophylline
treated patient who received saline in place of
hydrocortisone.
The mechanism of this interaction is uncertain but it is
advisable that patients on combined treatment be
monitored for signs of theophylline toxicity. When
possible serum theophylline levels should be frequently
determined, and the dosage of theophylline reduced as
necessary.

Sympathomimetic
aminedtheophylline
(1, 4-6) and (117-126)

There is an increased risk of hypokalaemia if
theophylline is given with high doses of bambuterol,
fenoterol, pirbuterol, reproterol, rimiterol, ritodrine,
salbutamol, salmeterol, terbutaline and tulobuterol. It
is recommended that serum potassium levels are
monitored in such situations.
&-Stimulant drugs increase CAMP production while
theophylline inhibits its breakdown, giving rise to
potential additive bronchodilator effects.
However, an ephedrine-theophylline combination may
increase toxicity without significantly increasing efficacy
(117, 118). Other studies in patients with mild to
moderate asthma indicated that a combination of
ephedrine and theophylline produced a greater
bronchodilation than either drug alone and that the
addition of hydroxyzine gave further improvement
(119- 120).
Orciprenaline (metaproterenol) increases
theophylline’s effectiveness without increasing side

INTERACTIONS WITH THEOPHYLLINE AND DERIVATIVES

Combination

257

Interaction

effects (121-123). Terbutaline also showed additive
effects to those of theophylline (124). Pulmonary
function was found to improve significantly after
inhalation of salbutamol (albuterol) after the maximum
bronchodilator effect from theophylline had been
achieved, or when the theophylline serum
concentration reached 20 p,g/ml without maximum
effect (125, 126).
It appears that combination use of &-stimulants and
theophylline may be useful if: (i) maximal
bronchodilation cannot be achieved with appropriate
doses of either agent alone; (ii) certain patients do not
tolerate appropriate doses of either agent alone; or
(iii) facilities are not available to monitor or interpret
serum theophylline concentrations.
Ulcer healing
agentdtheophylline
(127-154)

Increases in up to 25% in peak serum theophylline
concentrations have been reported after concomitant
oral administration of antacids (127, 128) although the
oral absorption of theophylline does not seem to be
affected (127, 129-130).
Comparative studies have suggested that ranitidine
does not significantly inhibit theophylline metabolism
(131-136) even at very high dosage (135), although
there have been occasional reports of theophylline
toxicity after concomitant ranitidine therapy (136-138).
Famotidine does not alter theophylline disposition
(139), but etinidine reduced the clearance of
theophylline and prolonged its elimination half-life
(140).
In contrast, cimetidine (1 g/day for 7 days) induced a
35% fall in systemic clearance of theophylline under
the same conditions (e.g. 30 min i.v. infusion of
theophylline (154).
An early report indicated that the elimination half-life
of theophylline was increased by a mean of 60% after
cimetidine administration (141). More detailed studies

258

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Ulcer healing
agentdtheophylline
cont.

Interaction

have shown that cimetidine significantly decreased
theophylline clearance by a mean of 39% ; the
apparent volume of distribution was unchanged,
whereas the elimination rate constant was significantly
decreased by a mean of 42%.
This corresponded to an average increase in
elimination half-life of 73% (142). Other studies in
young and elderly patients (143-147) and in healthy
subjects (148, 149) have produced similar findings. The
mechanism of this interaction is thought to be the
inhibitory effect of cimetidine on hepatic microsomal
mixed-function oxidases such as cytochrome P450 and
P448 (142, 149, 150).
Three cases have been reported in which cimetidine
apparently reduced the rate of metabolism of
aminophylline. The first of these (151), cimetidine
(300 mg qid) in an elderly patient evoked a grand ma1
seizure; her EEG was consistent with a toxic or
cerebral process. Large doses of aminophylline had
been used before cimetidine was started without any
complications. In the second case (152) theophylline
clearance was 4.75 l/hr before and 1.17 l/hr during
cimetidine (300 mg qid) treatment and theophylline
half-life increased from 2.7 to 7.8 hr. Steady-state
theophylline levels rose from 4.2 p.g/ml before
cimetidine to 25.7 kg/ml during cimetidine treatment.
The third case (152) had end-stage liver disease; her
theophylline half-life was tremendously long (118.8 hr)
and termination of cimetidine reduced this to 65.2 hr.
During cimetidine dosage her serum theophylline
concentration was 41.2 pg/ml. She died after liver
failure. The rapid decrease in theophylline half-life in
this patient and the fact that cimetidine is not
extensively metabolized has suggested that cimetidine
reversibly binds to the enzyme systems that metabolize
theophylline without actually interfering with the
intrinsic activity.
It has been suggested that the cimetidine-theophylline
interaction does not occur in the liver, and that
theophylline forms a complex with cimetidine in the
blood, thus preventing theophylline from being
metabolized (153).

INTERACTIONS WITH THEOPHYLLINE AND DERIVATIVES

259

Combination

Interaction

Uricosurics/theophylline
Allopurinol (1, 4-6,
155-157)

Allopurinol (300 mg every 12 hr for 14 or 28 days)
inhibited the metabolism of theophylline in normal
subjects. Half-life increased by 25% and AUC by
27%. Allopurinol given for 7 days under the same
conditions did not affect theophylline’s disposition
(155). Two other studies also showed that
pretreatment of normal subjects with oral allopurinol
(300 mg daily) for short periods had no effect on the
disposition of theophylline (156, 157). The mechanism
of the interaction may be explained by xanthine
oxidase being involved in the biotransformation of
theophylline in man. Allopurinol, a hypoxanthine
derivative, is a competitive inhibitor of xanthine
oxidase. High-dose allopurinol (300 mg bd) is likely to
increase theophylline levels.
The interaction is only likely to occur with relatively
high doses (but still within the clinical range) of
allopurinol given for periods longer than 7 days. The
interaction could also occur at lower doses of
allopurinol in patients whose theophylline elimination
was already compromized. Use of this combined
treatment may therefore require a reduction in
theophylline dosage to avoid its accumulation and
toxicity. Monitor theophylline levels in patients starting
or increasing allopurinol.

Sulphinpyrazone
(1, 158)

Plasma-theophylline levels are reduced by
sulphinpyrazone due to selective inhibition of
cytochrome P450 enzymes.

Vaccinedtheophylline
(159-168)

Eleven children whose asthma had been controlled
with a stable theophylline dose developed signs of
theophylline toxicity on the same dose during an
influenza B outbreak (159). All had clinical evidence
of a febrile viral illness. Two children had seizures,
eight had nausea and vomiting, and three had
headaches. Theophylline clearance gradually returned
to pre-illness levels over a period of 1-3 months (159).
These cases supported the earlier contention that
theophylline clearance was decreased during natural
viral respiratory infections (160-162).
Decreased elimination of theophylline also occurred

260

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Vaccinedtheophylline
cont.

Interaction

after influenza immunization in patients and in
volunteer subjects (161). In contrast, other studies
have indicated that influenza immunization had no
effect on theophylline levels in patients with chronic
airway obstruction (163, 164). However, the original
investigators have reiterated their previous conclusion
that influenza vaccine does alter theophylline
metabolism, and have suggested that the discrepancy
in findings may be due to the use of different vaccines
and that these may have different peak timing of their
depressant effect on drug metabolism (165).
Agents that induce interferon can inactivate hepatic
cytochrome P450. In as much as viruses are inducers of
interferon, this synthesis may be the most likely
mechanism of influenza virus and vaccine in altering
theophylline pharmacokinetics (166). Support is given
to this by the demonstration that influenza vaccination
depresses aminopyrine metabolism in man (167).
More recently, a study in elderly subjects showed that
clinically significant reactions to warfarin or
theophylline were rare after influenza vaccinations, and
were no more frequent than in those not receiving
vaccinations. Further, following influenza vaccination
in 13 elderly individuals serum concentrations of
theophylline showed no change. Others have found no
effect of influenza vaccine on theophylline clearance in
normal subjects nor in those with chronic obstructive
airways disease.
It must also be appreciated that, in theophyllinetreated patients, symptoms of vomiting, headaches or
seizures during viral illness may be due to theophylline
toxicity rather than to the virus. Such patients should
have an immediate serum theophylline determination
even if previous levels were in the therapeutic range
(159).
In practice clinically significant interactions have been
shown to occur with influenza virus infections but not
following vaccinations.
The British National Formulary remains cautious by

INTERACTIONS WITH THEOPHYLLINE AND DERIVATIVES

Combination

261

Interaction

stating “plasma-theophylline concentrations
occasionally increased by influenza vaccine”. The Data
sheets to none of the commercially available influenza
vaccines refer to this interaction (168).

REFERENCES

1 British National Formulary, (1996) Number 31, Appendix 1, British Medical
Association and The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, p. 537.
2 Richards W et al. (1988) A n n Allergy 61, 83.
3 Hirshmann CA et al. (1982) Anaesthesiology 56, 464.
4 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p .
1337 (theophyllineformulation - Lasma).
5 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p .
900 (theophyllineformulation - Slo-phyllin).
6 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p .
937 (theophyllic formulation - Nuelin).
7 Sugar AM et al. (1980) Am Rev Resp Dis 122, 501.
8 Lew G et al. (1989) Clin Pharm 8 , 225.
9 Soto J et al. (1990) DICP A n n Pharmacother 24, 471.
10 Stanley R et al. (1989) Am J Med 86, 733.
11 Ueno K et al. (1990) DICP A n n Pharmacother 24, 471.
12 Hunvitz A et al. (1991) Clin Pharmacol Ther 50, 299.
13 Loi CM et al. (1990) Clin Pharmacol Ther 49, 571.
14 Ueno K et al. (1991) DZCP Ann Pharmacother 25, 727.
15 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
937 (theophyllic formulation - Mexiletine).
16 Lee BL, Dohrmann ML. (1992) Clin Pharmacol Ther 51, 353.
17 Loi CM et al. (1993) Br J Clin Pharmacol35, 437.
18 Pfiefer HJ et al. (1979) Clin Pharmacol Ther 26, 36.
19 Pingleton SK et al. (1980) Chest 78, 352.
20 Maddux MS et al. (1982) Chest 81, 563.
21 LaForce CF et al. (1981) J Pediatr 99, 153.
22 Green JA, Clementi WA. (1983) Drug Intel1 Clin Pharm 17, 370.
23 Zarowitz BJM et al. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 29, 601.
24 Renton KW et al. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 30, 422.
25 Prince R A et al. (1981) J Allergy Clin Zmmunol 68, 427.
26 May DC et al. (1982) J Clin Pharmacol 22, 125.
27 Iliopoulou A et al. (1982) J Clin Pharmacol22, 125.
28 Jenne JW. (1982) Chest 81, 530.
29 Thompson JR et al. (1982) Curr Ther Res 32, 921.
30 Samigun et al. (1990) Br J Clin Pharmacol29, 570
31 Torrent J et al. (1989) DICP A n n Pharmacother 23, 143.
32 Wijnands WJA et al. (1984) Lancet ii, 108.
33 Wijnands WJA et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol22, 677.
34 Beckmann J et al. (1987) Eur J Clin Pharmacol33, 227.
35 Sano M et al. (1989) Eur J Clin Pharmacol36, 323.
36 Koup JR et al. (1990) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 34, 803.
37 Nix DE et al. (1987) J Antimicrob Chemother 19, 263.

262

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

38 Schwartz J et al. (1988) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 32, 75.
39 Robson RA et al. (1990) Br J Clin Pharmacol29, 491.
40 Bem JL, Mann RD. (1988) Br Med J 296, 1131.
41 Karki SD et al. (1990) DZCP A n n Pharmacother 24, 595.
42 Sano M et al. (1987) Eur J Clin Pharmacother 32, 431.
43 Ho G et al. (1988) Clin Pharmacol Ther 44, 35.
44 Davis RL et al. (1989) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 33, 212.
45 Gegoire SL et al. (1987) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 31, 375.
46 Green L, Clark J. (1989) J A M A 262, 2383.
47 Parent M et al. (1990) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 34, 1249.
48 LeBel M et al. (1990) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 34, 1254.
49 Starb A H et al. (1989) Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol 27, 289.
50 Matuschka PR et al. (1995) A n n Pharmacother 29, 378.
51 Jonkman JHG et al. (1985) Br J Clin Pharmacol 16, 735.
52 Straughn AB et al. (1984) Ther Drug Monit 6 , 153.
53 Robson RA et al. (1984) Br J Clin Pharmacol 18, 445.
54 Boyce EG et al. (1986) J Clin Pharmacol26, 696.
55 Adebayo GE et al. (1989) Eur J Clin Pharmacol37, 127.
56 Brocks DR et al. (1986) Clin Pharm 5, 602.
57 Gotz VP, Ryerson GG. (1986) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 20, 694.
58 McCormack JP et al. (1990) Clin Pharm 9, 546.
59 Jonkman JHG et al. (1985) Ther Drug Monit 7 , 92.
60 Weinberger M et al. (1977) J Allergy Clin Immunol59, 228.
61 Sperber AD (1991) Drug Safety 6 , 460
62 Griffin JP, D’Arcy PF. (1995) Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 272, 1-21.
63 Rasmussen BB et al. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 151-159.
64 Thomson AH et al. (1988) Ther Drug Monit 10, 359.
65 Perault MC et al. (1989) Ther Drug Monit 11, 520.
66 Sperber AD et al. (1991) Drug Safety 6 , 460.
67 Thomson AH et al. (1992) Pharm J 249, 137.
68 Donaldson K et al. (1994) Br J Clin Pharmacol37, 492P.
69 Puranik K et al. (1993) Care of the Elderly 5, 237.
70 Committee on Safety of Medicines/Medicines Control Agency. (1994) Curr Problems
20, 12.
71 Pafsky KM et al. (1977) Clin Pharmacol Ther 22, 336.
72 Jusko WJ et al. (1979) J Pharm Sci 68, 1358.
73 Saccar CL et al. (1985) J Allergy Clin Immunol75, 716.
74 Gibson GA et al. (1985) Ther Drug Monit 7 , 181.
75 Dahlqvist R et al. (1989) Ther Drug Monit 11, 408.
76 Raed RC, Schwartz HJ. (1983) N Engl J Med 308, 724.
77 Sklar ST, Wagner JC. (1985) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 19, 34.
78 Miller M et al. (1984) Clin Pharm Ther 35, 666.
79 Marquis J F et al. (1982) N Engl J Med 307, 1189.
80 Hendeles L et al. (1979) J Allergy Clin Immunol63, 156.
81 Rosenberry KR et al. (1983) J Pediatr 102, 472.
82 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1225-28 (Puconazole).
83 Konishi H et al. (1994) Eur J Clin Pharmacol46, 309.
84 Farquhar A et al. (1976) Biochem Pharmacol25, 1529.
85 Gray JD et al. (1983) Br J Clin Pharmacol 16, 735.
86 McElnay JC et al. (1982) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 16, 533.
87 Conrad KA, Nyman DW (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 28, 463.
88 Miners JO et al. (1985) Br J Clin Pharmacol20, 219.

INTERACTIONS WITH THEOPHYLLINE AND DERIVATIVES

263

89 Conrad KA, Nyman DW. (1980) Clin Pharm Ther 28, 463.
90 Cerasa LA et al. (1988) Br J Clin Pharmacol29, 800.
91 Corsi CM et al. (1990) Br J Clin Pharmacol29, 265.
92 Robson R A et al. (1988) Br J Clin Pharmacol 25, 397.
93 Burnakis TG et al. (1983) Clin Pharm 2, 458.
94 Jackson SHD et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol21, 389.
95 Adebayo GI, Mabadeje AFB. (1990) Biopharm Drug Dispos 11, 157.
96 Smither SR et al. (1989) J Clin Pharm Ther 14, 403.
97 Parrillo SJ, Venditto M. (1984) A n n Emerg Med 13, 216.
98 Harrod CS. (1987) Ann Intern Med 106, 480.
99 Spedini C, Lombardi C. (1986) Eur J Clin Pharmacol31, 105.
100 Bratel T et al. (1989) Eur J Clin Pharmacol36, 481.
101 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
909-910 (diltiazam).
102 Loi CM et al. (1989) Clin Pharmacol Ther 45, 476.
103 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1641-43 (interferon a ) .
104 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1654-57 (interferon a).
105 Williams SJ et al. (1987) Lancet ii, 939.
106 Jonkman JHG et al. (1989) Br J Clin Pharmacol27, 795.
107 Cook BL et al. (1985) J Clin Psychiatry 46, 278.
108 Zeltzer PM, Feig SA. (1979) Lancet ii, 960.
109 Hunt SN et al. (1976) Clin Pharmacol Ther 19, 546.
110 Powell JR et al. (1977) A m Rev Resp Dis 116, 17.
111 Jenne J et al. (1975) Life Sci 17, 195.
112 Horai Y et al. (1983) Eur J Clin Pharmacol24, 79.
113 Grygiel JJ, Birkett DJ. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 30, 491.
114 Jusko WJ et al. (1978) J Pharm Sci 68, 1358.
115 Ogilvie. RI (1978) Clin Pharmacokinet 3 , 267.
116 Buchanan N et al. (1979) S Afr Med J 56, 1147.
117 Weinberger M, Bronsky E. (1974) Clin Pharmacol Ther 15, 223.
118 Weinberger M et al. (1975) Clin Pharmacol Ther 17, 585
119 Chodosh S, Doraiswami S. (1975) Curr Ther Res 18, 773.
120 Badiei B et al. (1975) A n n Allergy 35, 32.
121 Duriseti S et al. (1978) J Allergy Clin Zmmunol61, 162.
122 Ziment I, Steen SN. (1978) Chest 73, 1016.
123 Giraldez J et al. (1980) J Allergy Clin Zmmunol65, 174.
124 Plummer AL, Cassidy BA. (1979) Ann Allergy 42, 218.
125 Addis GJ et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol 9, 289.
126 Barclay J et al. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacol 11, 203.
127 Darzentas LJ et al. (1983) Drug Zntell Clin Pharm 17, 555.
128 Myhre KI, Walstad RA. (1983) Br J Clin Pharmacol 15, 683.
129 Arnold LA et al. (1979) A m J Hosp Pharm 35, 1059.
130 Shargel L et al. (1981) J Pharm Sci 70, 599.
131 Breen KJ et al. (1982) Clin Pharmacol Ther 31, 297.
132 Segger JS et al. (1987) Arch Intern Med 147, 179.
133 Adebayo GI. (1989) Biopharm Drug Dispos 10, 77.
134 Boehning W. (1990) Eur J Clin Pharmacol38, 43.
135 Kelly HW et al. (1986) Clin Pharmacol Ther 39, 577.
136 Fernandes E , Malewicz FM. (1984) A n n Intern Med 100, 459.
137 Gardner ME, Sikorski GW. (1985) A n n Intern Med 100, 459.
138 Hegman GW, Gilbert RP. (1991) DZCP Ann Pharmacother 25, 21.

264

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

139 Chremos AN et al. (1986) Clin Pharmacol Ther 39, 187.
140 Huang SM et al. (1987) Biopharm Drug Dispos 8, 561.
141 Jackson JE et al. (1980) Pharmacologist 22, 231.
142 Jackson JE et al. (1981) Am Rev Resp Dis 123, 615.
143 Weinberger MM et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 672.
144 Hendeles L et al. (1981) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 15, 808.
145 Bauman JH, Kimelblatt BJ. (1981) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 15, 808.
146 Jackson JE, Plachetka JR. (1981) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 15, 809.
147 Vestal RE et al. (1983) Br J Clin Pharmacol 15, 411.
148 Reitberg DP et al. (1981) Ann Intern Med 95, 582.
149 Lalonde RL et al. (1983) Chest 83, 221.
150 Puurunen J, Pelkonen 0. (1979) Eur J Pharmacol55, 335.
151 Lofgren RP, Gilberton RA. (1982) Ann Intern Med 96, 378.
152 Cluxton RJ jun et al. (1982) Ann Intern Med 96, 684.
153 Zoglio MA, Maulding HU. (1970) J Pharm Sci 59, 215.
154 Breen KJ et al. (1982) Clin Pharmacol Ther 31, 297.
155 Manfredi RL, Vessel1 ES. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 29, 224.
156 Grygiel JJ et al. (1979) Clin Pharmacol Ther 26, 660.
157 Vozeh S et al. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 27, 194.
158 Birkett DJ et al. (1983) Br J Clin Pharmacol 15, 567.
159 Kraemer J et al. (1982) Pediatrics 69, 476.
160 Renton KW et al. (1980) Can Med Assoc J 123, 288.
161 Walker S et al. (1981) Can Med Assoc J 125, 243.
162 Chang KC et al. (1987) Lancet i , 1132.
163 Goldstein RS et al. (1982) Can Med Assoc J 126, 470.
164 Fischer RG. (1982) Can Med Assoc J 126, 1312.
165 Renton KW, Gray JD. (1982) Can Med Assoc J 125, 470.
166. Harless GR. (1983) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 17, 132.
167 Kramer P, McClain CJ. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 1262.
168 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London
(Fluvirin p. 554, Fluarix p. 1734, Fluzone p. 1696, Influvac p. 1747, Pasteur Merieux
p. 1207.

3.3 ANTIHISTAMINES

INTRODUCTION
Histamine exerts its actions via two types of receptors. Actions such as the stimulation of smooth muscle of the intestine and bronchi are antagonized by the conventional antihistamines and HI-receptors are involved, Actions of histamine not antagonized by conventional antihistamines, for example stimulation of gastric juice,
inhibition of uterine contractions and increase in heart rate, have been shown to
involve H2-receptors. This present section will only deal with interactions involving
HI-receptor antagonists, Interactions involving H2-receptor antagonists have already
been detailed in Chapter 1 (agents used to treat gastrointestinal disease).
Many conventional antihistamines have other pharmacological properties largely
independent of antihistaminic activity. These include anticholinergic, anti-adrenaline and antiserotonin effects. Some, including cinnarizine and flunarizine, have
calcium channel blocking activity. Most antihistamines are also CNS depressants,
although in very large doses they may cause CNS stimulation; most have some local
anaesthetic properties. Side effects with antihistamines vary in incidence and severity with each patient as much as with each drug. The most common effects are
sedation, varying from slight sedation to deep sleep, inability to concentrate, lassitude, dizziness, muscular weakness and incoordination. Sedative effects often diminish after a few days when tolerance is acquired.
Other side effects include nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, colic and epigastric pain;
antihistamines may also produce headache, blurred vision, tinnitus, irritability,
anorexia and dry mouth. In infants and children, some antihistamines have cerebral
stimulant properties, and overdosage may evoke convulsions and hyperpyrexia.
CNS stimulation may arise in some adults, especially after phenindamine tartrate
which differs from most conventional antihistamines in giving rise to stimulant side
effects and not sedation. Large doses of antihistamines may precipitate fits in
epileptics.
Antihistamines should be used with caution in epilepsy, prostatic hypertrophy,
urinary retention, glaucoma and hepatic disease (especially astemizole and terfenadine) if there is significant impairment. Most antihistamines should be avoided
in porphyria, but chlorpheniramine and cyclizine are thought to be safe. Some
antihistamines have been associated with fetal abnormalities when taken during
pregnancy, but a large number of studies have failed to demonstrate any strong
associations; some packs of antihistamines sold to the public carry warnings to avoid

265

266

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

in pregnancy (1).The manufacturers of astemizole advise avoiding during pregnancy
(2).
Significant amounts of some antihistamines occur in breast milk and, although
not known to be harmful, some manufacturers advise avoiding antihistamines whilst
breast-feeding (3). Drowsiness, irritability and refusal to feed has been reported in
a 10-week-old breast-fed baby, 12 hr after her mother started treatment with clemastine (4).
There are undoubtedly too many antihistamines available; although they may be
classified according to their chemical structures, this offers little useful information
to the clinician. An attempt has therefore been made in this present context to
divide the conventional antihistamines in common medicinal use into two groups:
Group 1, non-sedative; and Group 2, sedative. The majority of conventional antihistamines fall into Group 2.
There is no evidence that any one of the older sedative antihistamines is superior
to any other and patients vary widely in their responses. Acrivastine, astemizole,
cetirizine, loratadine and terfenadine are newer antihistamines; they are a major
advance over over the older antihistamines. They cause less sedation and psychomotor impairment because they only penetrate the blood-brain barrier to a slight
extent (and for this reason do not alleviate pruritus of non-allergic origin). Astemizole has a relatively slow onset on action and is more appropriate for use on a
regular basis than when symptoms occur (lBNF, ch 3.4, p. 135).

GROUP 1: NON-SEDATIVE" ANTIHISTAMINES
acrivastine
astemizole
cetirizine
loratadine
terfenadine
*Although drowsiness is rare, nevertheless patients should be advised that it can
occur and may affect performance of skilled tasks (e.g. driving): excess alcohol
should be avoided.

GROUP 2: SEDATIVE ANTIHISTAMINES
azatadine maleate
doxylamine
brompheniramine maleate
flunarizine hydrochloride
buclizine
hydroxyzine hydrochloride
chlorpheniramine maleate
ketotifen
cinnarizine
mequitazine
clemastine
phenindamine tartrate
cyclizine
pheniramine maleate
cyproheptadine hydrochloride
promethazine hydrochloride

ANTIHISTAMINES

dimenhydrinate
diphenhydramine hydrochloride
diphenylpyraline hydrochloride

267

promethazine theoclate
trimeprazine tartrate
triprolidine hydochloride

INDICATIONS
Antihistamines are used for the symptomatic relief of hypersensitivity reactions;
they are generally considered to be ineffective in asthma. Acute anaphylaxis should
be treated with adrenaline; antihistamines and corticosteroids are given to prevent
relapse. Antihistamines are used to control the pruritus associated with skin disorders; some including promethazine are used for their sedative effects. Some have
anti-emetic properties and are used to control nausea and vomiting due to a number
of causes, especially motion sickness. They are also used in the symptomatic treatment of the vertigo, nausea and vomiting of MCnibres disease and other vestibular
disorders. Buclizine and cyclizine are used to alleviate the nausea and vomiting
associated with migraine; cyproheptadine and flunarizine may be of value in the
prophylaxis of migraine in children. Antihistamines are widely used, often with a
decongestant, in compound preparations for the symptomatic treatment of cough
and the common cold; there is little evidence such preparations are effective.
Topical application of antihistamines is generally considered to be inadvisable because of the risk of skin sensitization reactions; dermatological reactions may occasionally occur after oral dosage.
INTERACTIONS
Antihistamines are most likely to enhance the sedative effects of CNS depressants
including alcohol, barbiturates, hypnotics, opioid narcotics, anxiolytics, sedatives,
and neuroleptics. MA01 antidepressants may enhance the the antimuscarinic effects
of antihistamines, and antihistamines have an additive effect with other antimuscarinic drugs such as atropine, tricyclic antidepressants and similar compounds.
It has been suggested that antihistamines could mask the warning signs of ototoxicity caused by the aminoglycoside antibiotics and other ototoxic agents. The potential for ventricular arrhythmias should be kept in mind when astemizole or terfenadine are used in combination with other drugs, especially since both these
antihistaminics are available in the UK without prescription.
Antihistamines may suppress positive skin test results and should be stopped
several days before these tests, It should be noted that some antihistamines are
incompatible, in vitro, with other drugs if mixed in injections or infusions (9,a list
of these incompatibilities, most of which are reported in early publications, is
included at the end of the following Table of Drug Interactions.
Combination

Antihistaminel
anticholinesterase

Interaction

Some antihistamines have significant anticholinergic
effects (e.g. cyclizine, cyproheptadine,

268

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antihistaminel
anticholinesterase cont.

diphenhydramine, phenindamine, promethazine,
trimeprazine, etc); this will antagonize the miotic effect
of an anticholinesterase drug. Such combinations
should be avoided. (6).

Antihistaminel
anticonvulsant

A case has been reported on an interaction between
terfenadine and the anticonvulsant carbamazepine. The
patient, an 18-year-old woman, was on anticonvulsant
therapy after treatment for brain metastases. She was
admitted to hospital with symptoms of confusion,
disorientation, visual hallucinations, nausea and ataxia
and she had a history of atopia. These symptoms
started shortly after taking terfenadine (60 mg twice
daily by mouth) for symptomatic relief of rhinitis.
Serum levels of carbamazepine were almost three
times the normal level. Since both drugs are highly
protein bound, the clinicians thought that the
terfenadine had displaced the carbamazepine resulting
in the increased serum levels. After stopping the
terfenadine, symptoms resolved and serum levels of
carbamazepine returned to within the normal range
(7).
These drugs should not be used concomitantly.

carbamazepine

phenytoin

A young woman developed drowsiness, ataxia,
diplopia, and tinnitus and episodes of occipital
headache associated with vomiting after concomitant
administration of phenytoin sodium and
chlorpeniramine (8). Chlorpheniramine was thought
to delay the hepatic metabolism of phenytoin and
increase its plasma concentration to toxic levels.

Antihistaminel
buphenine

Antihistamines having a phenothiazine structure (e.g.
mequitazine, trimeprazine promethazine) are
potentiated by the sympathomimetic vasodilator
buphenine, which acts predominantly on P-adrenergic
receptors (9, 10). These drugs should not be used
concurrently.

Antihistaminel
Ca-channel blocker

Cinnarizine is a calcium-channel blocker; the Spanish
System of Pharmacovigilance has received reports of
tinnitus associated with calcium-channel blockers,
including one relating to cinnarizine, when patients

ANTIHISTAMINES

Combination

269

Interaction

also received other ototoxic drugs (11).WHO have
additional reports of tinnitus associated with calciumchannel blockers including cinnarizine.
Antihistamine/
catecholamine

Some, but not all, antihistamines potentiate the
cardiovascuar effects of adrenaline and noradrenaline.
This is due to inhibition of neural uptake of
catecholamine, resulting in an increased amount of
unbound catecholamine which then reacts with cardiac
and vascular receptor sites (12). The possibility of
increased catecholamine toxicity should be realized.
Since catecholamines are histamine antagonists, the
need for concomitant antihistamine dosage is virtually
minimal. Fixed combinations of antihistamines and
catecholamines are therefore illogical.

Antihistamine/
chloroquine

Cyproheptadine has been shown to reverse
chloroquine resistance in malaria parasites in vitro.
However, clinical studies have been disappointing as
they have not shown this and other drugs (e.g.
desipramine, verapamil to be effective at clinically
tolerable dosage (13-17).

AntihistamineKNS
depressant (6)

Antihistamines are most likely to enhance the sedative
effects of all CNS depressants including alcohol,
barbiturates, hypnotics, opioid narcotics, anxiolytics,
sedatives and neuroleptics. This type of interaction has
been frequently documented and many deaths have
resulted. In particular alcohol and other CNS
depressants may so enhance the effects of
antihistamines that patients are at special risk when
driving or operating any machinery where loss of
attention may lead to accidents.

Antihistmine/
diagnostic test
cyproheptadine

Cyproheptadine reduced hypoglycaemia-induced
growth hormone secretion by between 5 and 97% in
eight healthy subjects (18). It was suggested that if
patients receiving cyproheptadine were given a
pituitary function test which used growth hormone
response to insulin-induced hypoglycaemia, then

270

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antihistmine/
diagnostic test
cyproheptadine cont.

cyproheptidine treatment should be stopped before the
test.

diphenhydramine

There has been a report suggesting that since
diphenhydramine inhibits the cytochrome P450 enzyme
system, it may interfere with the debrisoquine testing
for genetic polymorphism (19).

Antihistamine
(astemizole)/
erythromycin
ketoconazole
itraconazole

The US Food and Drug Administration has warned
that astemizole should not be prescribed in
combination with the antifungal drugs, ketoconazole or
itraconazole, or the antibiotic, erythromycin (20).
The FDA have received reports of serious cardiac
arrhythmias in two patients who took astemizole with
erythromycin or with erythromycin plus ketoconazole.
The FDA has also issued a similar warning for another
antihistamine, terfenadine (21) (see below).
Both antihistamines are metabolized in the liver and
are potentiated in their effects (raised plasma
concentrations) by drugs which are potent inhibitors of
hepatic microsomal enzymes, notably erythromycin
and ketoconazole. The FDA have included
itraconazole in the warning because of its chemical and
pharmacological similarity to ketoconazole.
The UK Committee on Safety of Medicines has issued
a similar warning and has cautioned that at high serum
concentrations, or as a consequence of drug
interaction, they prolong the QT interval and thus
have the potential to induce ventricular arrhythmias.
By October 1992, the CSM had received 18 reports of
adverse reactions with astemizole affecting the
cardiovascular system, and 94 reports
(including three sudden deaths and three other
fatalities) of similar adverse reactions to terfenadine.

Antihistamine/
anti-arrhythmics
neuroleptics
tricyclics
diuretics

The CSM cautioned against concomitant
administration of astemizole or terfenadine with drugs
having an arrhythmogenic potential such as antiarrhythmics, neuroleptics, tricyclic antidepressants,
diuretics and drugs producing an electrolyte imbalance.
The CSM warned that astemizole or terfenadine

ANTIHISTAMINES

Combination

fluvoxamine

271

Interaction

should not be used in combination with erythromycin
or oral ketoconazole. The CSM also suggested that it
would also be prudent to avoid concomitant use of
other macrolide antibiotics and imidazole antifungal
agents (notably itraconazole) (22).
It has also been advised that use with fluvoxamine be
avoided. Astemizole should not be used in patients
with pre-existing prolongation of the QT interval or
hypokalaemia or other electrolyte imbalance.
Concomitant administration with potentially
arrhythmogenic agents, such as anti-arrhythmic agents,
tricyclic antidepressants, antipsychotics, sotalol,
halofantrine, terfenadine, or diuretics that produce
hypokalaemia should be avoided (23).
The toxic potential of astemizole or terfenadine (see
below) either alone or each in combination with
interacting drugs is a matter of concern; they are
widely used for the treatment of hay fever and allergic
conditions and in the UK are available from
pharmacies without prescription.

Antihistamine
(cyclizine)/
methohexitone and
narcotic analgesics

Cyclizine lactate (50 mg) was a poor preoperative
sedative. It increased the incidence of excitatory
phenomena after methohexitone anaesthesia, enhanced
the soporific effects of pethidine but reduced both
preoperative and postoperative sickness (24). In later
studies cyclizine was shown to reduce significantly the
incidence of vomiting associated with oral
dihydrocodeine, dipipanone, levorphanol, methadone,
or pethidine (25). Cyclizine lactate is incompatible with
morphine sulphate in solution (26).

Antihistamine
(diphenhydramine)/
temazepam

There is a report suggesting that a reduction in
temazepam metabolism caused by diphenylhydramine
may have contributed to a perinatal death after
ingestion of these drugs by the mother (10). This
combination should be avoided especially by pregnant
women. The manufacturers of temazepam warn that
the drug should not be used during pregnancy,
especially during the first and last trimesters, unless
there are compelling reasons.

272

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Antihistamine
(loratadine)/
erythromycin
ketoconazole

cimetidine

Antihistamine
(terfenadine)/
erythromycin
clarithromycin
itraconazole
ketoconazole
troleandomycin

fluoxetine

fluconazole

Interaction

Data held on file by the manufacturers show that
erythromycin can inhibit the metabolism of loratadine.
However, even when given in large doses, loratadine
does not appear to cause cardiac conductive disorders
associated with other non-sedative antihistaminics such
as astemizole and terfenadine (27). Ketoconazole
appears to be able to inhibit the metabolism of
loratadine and, at therapeutic doses, is apparently
three times more inhibitory than erythromycin (28).
However, the concentrations of ketoconazole required
are reported to be much higher than those required to
inhibit the metabolism of astemizole or terfenadine.
Cimetidine also appears to inhibit the metabolism of
loratadine and all three drugs also attenuate the
clearance of its active metabolite descarboethoxyloratadine although no clinically significant
consequences were observed in these studies (28).
Terfenadine is extensively metabolized in the liver and
the toxicity of the parent compound is increased by
inhibitors of hepatic metabolism (29). Pharmacokinetic
studies have demonstrated that the macrolide
antibiotics, erythromycin (30) and clarithromycin (31)
and the imidazole antifungal agents, itraconazole (32)
and ketoconazole (33) interfere with the metabolism of
terfenadine leading to its accumulation. A high plasma
terfenadine concentration is associated with
prolongation of the QT interval and arrhythmias such
as torsade de pointes have been reported in patients
treated with therapeutic doses of terfenadine and
erythromycin (34), troleandomycin (35), ketoconazole
(36) or itraconazole (32, 37). Cardiac abnormalities
have occurred in patients taking terfenadine and
fluoxetine concomitantly (38). The manufacturers
literature states that concomitant administration of
terfenadine with erythromycin, clarithromycin,
troleandomycin, itraconazole or ketoconazole is
contraindicated. Some authorities also include other
macrolide antibiotics and other imidazole antifungals in
this contraindication. There has been a
pharmacokinetic study that suggested that the
interaction between terfenadine and fluconazole might

ANTIHISTAMINES

Cornbination

273

Interaction

not be clinically significant as the mechanism of the
interaction appeared to involve the metabolite of
terfenadine and did not lead to the accumulation of
the cardiotoxic parent compound (39). But this may
not always be so, since studies in small groups of
patients who exhibited abnormal patterns of
terfenadine metabolism demonstrated increases in
terfenadine concentrations associated with ECG
abnormalities when terfenadine was given with high
doses of fluconazole (40) ; the manufacturers warn
against the use of this combination.

Antihistaminel
grapefruit juice

A variety of drugs (see review (41)) including
terfenadine interact with grapefruit juice and
potentiate their effects (42). The mechanism of this
interaction is inhibition of cytochrome P450 by the
bitter flavonoids (naringin, naringenin, quercetin,
kaempferol) present in grapefruit juice; terfenadine
being metabolized by the family member CYP3A4.
The most recent study on the effects of grapefruit juice
on the pharmacokinetic and electrocardiographic
repolarization pharmacodynamics of terfenadine in
poor metabolizers of terfenadine showed an
accumulation of unmetabolized parent compound and
more importantly the changes in ECG repolarization
that resulted from this accumulation (43).
The results were consistent with a former study on
subjects who were not poor metabolizers of
terfenadine (42). The authors suggested that the
prolongation of the QT interval caused by this
interaction might cause an increased risk of
arrhythmias especially for torsade de pointes patients.
However, there are no reports in the FDA
Spontaneous Reporting System database which
implicates grapefruit juice as a co-factor in terfenadinerelated morbidity or mortality. The authors of the
report believe that it is unlikely that practitioners
would have appreciated the effect of this popular
beverage on drug pharmacokinetics.
In the UK, the Medicines Control Agency is currently
investigating the possible interaction between
terfenadine and grapefruit juice which is reported to

274

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornb ina tion

Interaction

Antihistamine/
grapefruit juice cont.

more than double the plasma levels of the unchanged
drug (44).

Antihistamine
(tripelennamine)/other
antihistamines

A severe toxic reaction including agitation,
hallucinations and myoclonic jerks occurred in an 8year-old child who was sprayed over the trunk and
extremities with an aerosol of tripelennamine
hydrochloride in the treatment of severe poison ivy
poisoniong (45). It was likely that the inhalation of the
fine aerosol spray was responsible for these reactions,
but the original reaction was inadvertently prolonged
by subsequent treatment with diphenhydramine and
promethazine.

Antihistamines/other
drugs in solution

Antihistamines have been frequently given
intravenously with other drugs to diminish unwanted
reactions to these other agents. This practice has given
rise to a large number of physicochemical
incompatibilities. Some data are presented here;
regarding incompatibilities in solutions, they have been
gained from the monographs of individual
antihistamines in the latest edition of Martindale, The
Extra Pharmacopoeia (46) and from the literature.
Further information should be obtained from the
manufacturers.

Brompheniramine
maleate

Incompatible with some diatrizoate, iodipamide and
iothalamate salts (47).

Chlorpheniramine
maleate

Incompatible with calcium chloride, kanamycin
sulphate, noradrenaline acid tartrate, pentobarbitone
sodium and iodipamide meglumine (47, 48).

Cyclizine lactate

Injection incompatible with morphine sulphate (26),
oxytetracycline hydrochloride, chlortetracycline
hydrochloride, benzylpenicillin, and solutions with a
pH of 6.8 or more.

Dimenhydrinate

Incompatible in solution with aminophylline,
ammonium chloride, chloramphenicol, heparin,
hydrocortisone sodium succinate, hydroxyzine
hydrochloride, iodipamide, glycopyrronium bromide,

ANTIHISTAMINES

Combination

275

Interaction

methoxamine, meglumine, nicotinic acid, some
phenothiazines, phenytoin, prednisolone, promazine
hydrochloride, promethazine hydrochloride, pyridoxine
hydrochloride, radio-contrast media, some soluble
barbiturates, and tetracycline (47-51).
Diphenhydramine

Incompatible with amphotericin, cephalothin sodium,
hydrocortisone sodium succinate, some soluble
barbiturates, some contrast media and solutions of
alkalis or strong acids (48, 51-54).

Hydroxyzine
hydrochloride

Incompatibility with aminophylline, benzylpenicillin
salts, chloramphenicol sodium succinate,
dimenhydrinate, thioridazine, and some soluble
barbiturates. However, an aqueous mixture of
hydroxyzine hydrochloride, chlorpromazine
hydrochloride, and pethidine hydrochloride stored in
glass or plastric syringes was stable for 1 year at room
temperature (55).

Promethazine
hydrochloride

Incompatible with alkaline substances which precipitate
the insoluble base, aminophylline, barbiturates,
benzylpenicillin salts, carbenicillin sodium,
chloramphenical sodium succinate, chlorothiazide
sodium, cefoperazone sodium, dextran,
dimenhydrinate, diodone, ethamivan, frusemide,
heparin sodium, hydrocortisone sodium succinate,
methicillin sodium, morphine sulphate, nalbuphine
hydrochloride, nitrofurantoin, phenytoin,
prednisolone, some contrast media, sulphadimidine
and sulphafurazole (47, 48, 51, 53, 56-58).

Thiethylperazine
maleate

Incompatibility with nalbuphine hydrochloride
injection (59).

Tripelenamine
hydrochloride

Incompatible with with the following drugs in solution:
chloramphenicol sodium succinate, phenobarbitone
sodium and phenytoin sodium (48).

276

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

REFERENCES

1 British National Formulary (1996) No. 31, Chapter 3.4.1. British Medical Association
and The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, p. 135.
2 British National Formulary (1996) No. 31, Appendix 4. British Medical Asociation and
The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, p. 575.
3 British National Formulary (1996) No, 31, Appendix 5 . British Medical Association and
The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, p. 585.
4 Kok THHG et al. (1982) Lancet i, 914.
5 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 429.
6 Committee on Safety of Drugs (1968) Chem Drug 190, 254.
7 Hirschfeld S, Jarosinski P. (1993) Ann Intern Med 118, 907.
8 Pugh RNH et al. (1975) Br J Clin Pharmacol2, 173.
9 Chu I et al. (1966) Int J Neuropsychiatr 2, 53.
10 Kargas GA et al. (1985) N Engl J Med 313, 1417.
11 Narvaez M et al. (1994) Lancet 343, 1229.
12 Isaac L, Goth A. (1967) J Pharmacol Exp Ther 156, 463.
13 Bitonti AJ, McCann PP. (1989) Lancet ii, 1282.
14 Peters W et al. (1989) Lancet ii, 334.
15 Salama A , Facer CA. (1990) Lancet 335, 164.
16 Basco LK, le Bras J. (1990) Lancet 335, 422.
17 Bjorkman A et al. (1990) Lancet 336, 59.
18 Bivens CH et al. (1973) N Engl J Med 289, 236.
19 Poirier J et al. (1987) Lancet ii, 386.
20 Noticeboard (1992) Lancet 340, 1155.
21 Ahmad SR. (1992) Lancet 340, 542.
22 Committee on Safety of Medicines (1992) Curr Prob 35. Committee on Safety of Medicines, London, p. 1.
23 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 434.
24 Dundee JW et al. (1966) Br J Anaesth 38, 50.
25 Dundee JW, Jones PO. (1968) Br J Clin Pract 22, 379.
26 Marshall IW. (1971) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 28th edn, The Pharmaceutical
Press, London, p. 1307.
27 Affrime MB et al. (1993) J Allergy Clin Immunol91, 259.
28 Brannan MD et al. (1995) Clin Pharmacol Ther 57, 193.
29 Kivisto KT et al. (1994) Clin Pharrnacokinet 27, 1.
30 Honig PK et al. (1992) Clin Pharmacol Ther 52, 231.
31 Honig P et al. (1993) Clin Pharmacol Ther 53, 161.
32 Pohjola-Sintonen S et al. (1993) Eur J Clin Pharmacol45, 191.
33 Honig PK et al. (1993) JAMA 269, 1513.
34 Biglin KE et al. (1994) Ann Pharmacother 28, 282.
35 Fournier P et al. (1993) Ann Cardiol Angeiol (Paris) 42, 249.
36 Monahan BP et al. (1990) J A M A 264, 2788.
37 Crane JK et al. (1993) Am J Med 95, 445.
38 Swims MP. (1993) A n n Pharmacother 27, 1404.
39 Honig PK et al. (1993) Clin Pharmacol Ther 53, 630.
40 Cantilena LR et al. (1995) Clin Pharmacol Ther 57, 185.
41 Bailey D G et al. (1994) Clin Pharmacokinet 26, 91.
42 Benton R et al. (1994) Clin Pharmacol Ther 55, 146.
43 Honig PK et al. (1996) J Clin Pharmacol36, 345.
44 Anon. (1996) Pharm J 257, 313.

ANTIHISTAMINES

277

45 Schipior PG. (1967) J Pediatr 71, 589.
46 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, pp. 427-455.
47 Marshall TR et al. (1965) Radiobiology 84, 536.
48 Pate1 JA, Phillips GL. (1966) Am J Hosp Pharm 23, 409.
49 Grant HR. (1962) Hosp Pharmacist 15, 67.
50 Brudney N et al. (1963) Can Pharm J 96, 470.
51 Misgen R. (1965) Am J Hosp Pharm 22, 92.
52 Bruin VH, Oliver WH. (1957) Aust J Pharm 38, 226.
53 Riffkin C. (1963) Am J Hosp Pharm 20, 19.
54 Meisler JM, Skolaut MW. (1966) Am J Hosp Pharm 23, 557.
55 Conklin CA et al. (1985) Am J Hosp Pharm 42, 339.
56 Otterman GE, Samuelson DW. (1979) Am J Hosp Pharm 36, 1156.
57 Fleischer NM. (1973) Am J Hosp Pharm 30, 665.
58 Riley BB. (1970) Am J Hosp Pharm 28, 228.
59 Jump WG et al. (1982) Am J Hosp Pharm 39, 841.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 4
Drug Interactions with Agents Used in
the Treatment of CNS Disorders

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

4.1 INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED
IN THE TREATMENT OF
SCHIZOPHRENIA AND RELATED
PSYCHOSES
Antipsychotic agents are also known as neuroleptics and as major tranquillisers
although the latter term is misleading. Neuroleptics include the phenothiazines,
butyrophenones and related compounds, and the thioxanthines. All are used in the
treatment of psychoses such as schizophrenia, mania, senile dementia and certain
behavioural disorders of children.
Rauwolfia alkaloids, notably reserpine were similarly used in these conditions but
should now be regarded as obsolete. Antipsychotic drugs are considered to act
by interfering with dopaminergic transmission in the brain by blocking dopamine
receptors and thus may give rise to extrapyramidal side effects, including tardive
dyskinesia, and also to hyperprolactinaemia and gynaecomastia due to inhibition
of the release of prolactin-releasing inhibitory factor. Antipsychotic agents all have
some a-adrenergic, histaminergic and serotonergic antagonist/agonist effects.

I. PHENOTHIAZINES
There are undoubtedly far too many phenothiazines available and, although they
can be readily classified according to their chemical structure, this per se offers
little useful information to the clinician. However, although the properties of the
phenothiazines are similar, there are quantitative and qualitative differences in their
action which can be relevant in their selection.

Group 1: Phenothiazines with a Dimethyl-amino-propylSide Chain
Phenothiazines with the dimethyl-amino-propyl side chain generally have a marked
sedative effect and are of value in the treatment of psychoses where agitation is a
feature. This group of phenothiazines has moderate antimuscarinic effects and a
moderate propensity to cause extrapyramidal side effects. Tardive dyskinesia can
occur with prolonged administration.
Chlorpromazine
Fluopromazine
Methotrimeprazine

281

282

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Promazine
Prothipendyl hydrochloride
Group 2: Phenothiazines with a Piperidine Side Chain
This group is characterized by fewer moderate sedative effects, marked antimuscarinic effects and fewer extrapyramidal effects than Groups 1 and 3.
Pericy azine
Piperacetazine
Pipothiazide
Thioridazine hydrochloride
Group 3: Phenothiazines with a Piperazine Side Chain
This group is characterized by fewer sedative effects and fewer anti-muscarinic
effects than Groups 1 and 2. Extrapyramidal side effects are, however, much more
pronounced and frequent.
Acetophenazine maleate
Butaperazine maleate or phosphate
Carphenazine maleate
Fluphenazine deconoate, enanthate or hydrochloride
Perphenazine
Pipothiazine palmitate and undecenoate
Prochlorperazine edisylate, maleate and mesylate
Thiethylperazine maleate
Thiopropazate hydrochloride
Thioproperazine mesylate
Trifluoperazine hydrochloride
The side effects of phenothiazines include sedation, dryness of mouth, potentiation
of sedatives and narcotics, hypothermia, postural hypotension, constipation, extrapyramidal parkinsonian signs, weight increase, skin rashes (including contact dermatitis) and light sensitivity, obstructive jaundice and blood dyscrasias. Continuous
use of chlorpromazine over many years has been associated with granular deposits
and opacity in the lens and cornea and with skin pigmentation. Chlorpromazine
and other phenothiazines alter endocrine function; patients have experienced impotence, amenorrhoea, galactorrhoea, gynaecomastia and weight gain. There have
been reports of iatrogenic diabetes mellitus and raised serum cholesterol concentrations. The phenothiazines are epileptogenic and grand ma1 convulsions are occasionally precipitated.
11. DRUGS OF OTHER CHEMICAL GROUPS
These tend to resemble phenothiazines of Group 3 in their actions.

DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA AND RELATED PSYCHOSES

283

1. Butyrophenones and Related Compounds
Benperidol
Clozapine
Droperidol
Haloperidol
Loxapine
Oxypertine
Penflurido1
Trifluperidol hydrochloride

The butyrophenones are chemically related to pethidine, and their neuroleptic
properties were discovered during a search for analgesic compounds. Haloperidol
is the prototype of the series.
Butyrophenones are absorbed promptly and almost completely; peak levels occur
in 2-6 hr and excretion is very slow. Cumulation thus occurs readily and this has
important consequences on dosage and on interaction with other drugs, especially
CNS depressants.
Haloperidol and related compounds produce clinical effects similar to those of
the phenothiazines. They have a selective depressant action on the CNS; the actions
of dopamine are inhibited and the turnover of dopamine in the brain increased.
Side effects include extrapyramidal symptoms, motor restlessness and dystonic
reactions, drowsiness and dizziness. Depression may be worsened. Other side effects
are similar to those of the phenothiazines but the butyrophenones are virtually
devoid of autonomic side effects.
Penfluridol has a prolonged duration of action; occasional glycosuria has been
reported with pimozide and hypersalivation with trifluperidol. Oxypertine releases
catecholamines and should therefore not be given concurrently with or within 1014 days of cessation of treatment with a MA01 drug. Blood counts and liver
function tests are desirable for patients on long-term dosage with oxypertine; raised
transaminase values have been reported in some patients.
Clozapine has been reported to cause neutropoenia, agranulocytosis and pancytopenia, blood counts should be made weekly for the first 18 weeks of treatment and
then at least every 2 weeks. Myocarditis has been reported. Circulatory collapse
with precipitate hypotension has been reported and for this reason treatment should
commence at a low dose (12.5 mg) once or twice per day, then 25-50 mg on the
second day, then increasing in steps of 25-50-mg per day over 14-21 days to a 300mg therapeutic dose in divided doses, 100mg in the morning 200mg at bed time.
To obtain an optimum effect the dose may have to be increased to a maximum
daily dose of 900 mg per day.
Loxapine can cause ocular toxicity, and patients should be regularly observed for
pigmentary retinopathy, and lenticular pigmentation (23).

284

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

2. Thioxanthenes
Chlorprothixene
Flupenthixol hydrochloride or decanoate
Thiothixene hydrochloride
Zuclopenthixol hydrochloride
The thioxanthenes (thioxanthines) are a series of compounds structurally similar to
the phenothiazines. They retain the sulphur atom but not the nitrogen atom in the
middle ring of the phenothiazine nucleus. Thus they provide a parallel series of
psychotropic drugs to the phenothiazines.
They have actions and uses as for chlorpromazine but have some antidepressant
properties which may lead to insomnia and restlessness. Side effects are similar to
those of the phenothiazines.
Some hyperactive patients may be overstimulated by thiothixene; sedation is
infrequent and patients may experience insomnia; extrapyramidal symptoms are
common with this drug.

3. Diphenyl Butylpiperidines
Fluspirilene
Pimozide

4. Sulpiride and Remoxipride
Sulpiride and remoxipride are structurally distinct from other antipsychotic drugs.
In high doses sulpiride can control the most florid schizophrenic behaviour, but in
low doses it has an alerting effect on apathetic withdrawn patients.
Remoxipride is a benzisoxazole derivative and is reported to have a much lesser
propensity to cause extrapyramidal side effects than other agents. Its usefulness is
curtailed by its propensity to cause blood dyscrasias.
The British National Formulary (4)presents a table of equivalent doses of oral
antipsychotic agents but warns that these equivalences are only for guidance.

Antipsychotic

Daily dose

Chlorpromazine
Clozapine
Haloperidol
Loxapine
Pimozide
Sulpiride
Thioridazine
Trifluoperazine

100 mg
50 mg
2-3 mg
10-20 mg
2 mg
200 mg
100 mg
5 mg

DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA AND RELATED PSYCHOSES

285

DEPOT INJECTIONS
Depot injections of certain antipsychotic agents have been developed with the
objective of ensuring compliance with therapy in schizophrenic patients, and enabling some patients to be released into the community. Depot injections are usually
required every 2 or 4 weeks.
Immediately after an injection much higher circulating blood levels of the active
agent may occur with an increased incidence of extrapyramidal side effects.
Flupenthixol decanoate
Fluphenazine decanoate
Haloperidol decanoate
Pipothiazide palmitate
Zuclopenthixol decanoate

40 mg at 2-week intervals
25 mg at 2-week intervals
100 mg at 4-week intervals
50 mg at 4-week intervals
200 mg at 2-week intervals

There is generally little to choose between these regimes for most patients, but
zuclopenthixol is said to be more suitable for agitated and aggressive schizophrenics.
Flupenthixol can cause increase in agitation and aggressive behaviour in such patients.
Combination

Alcohol and other CNS
depressant drugs/
antipsychotic agents
(6, 8-13, 22, 61)

Interaction

Alcohol potentiates the effect of the major
tranquillisers .Increased CNS-depressant effects may
result from combination of drugs sharing
pharmacological properties. The effects of narcotic
analgesics and the phenothiazines are additive (13).

Antacids/chlorpromazine Antacids such as aluminium hydroxide decrease the
absorption of phenothiazines by forming an absorption
(L2)
complex with them.
Anticoagulant/
phenothiazines ( 5 )

Metabolism of coumarin anticoagulants reduced owing
to inhibition of microsomal enzymes by
chlorpromazine. Increased laboratory monitoring of
prothrombin time needed if this combination is used.

Anticonvulsants/
antipsychotics (74)
Phen ytoin/
phenothiazines

Antipsychotic agents lower the convulsive threshold
Chlorpromazine and prochlorperazine impair the
metabolism of phenytoin and increase the risk of
phenytoin intoxication. Other phenothiazine
tranquillisers might be expected to interact in the same
way.

286

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

Carbamazepine/
haloperidol

Phenytoin/clozapine (4)
Phenytoidthioridazine
(74, 79)

Interaction

Carbamazepine accelerates the metabolic breakdown
of haloperidol. After stopping carbamazepine it may
be necessary to reduce the dose of haloperidol. The
dosage of anticonvulsants may need to be increased
since haloperidol reduces convulsive threshold.
Phenytoin accelerates the metabolic breakdown of
clozapine. Reduced clozapine effect.
Clinically significant phenytoin intoxication occurred in
two cases during concomitant administration of
thioridazine. Thioridazine and phenytoin are both
metabolized in the liver and each competes with the
other for cytochrome P450 hydroxylation; thus the
enzyme becomes saturated and phenytoin metabolism
is inhibited.
Potentiation of effects of phenytoin and increased
potential of resulting toxicity have also been reported
after the combined use of phenytoin with
chlorpromazine or prochlorperazine (74).
If combined treatment is necessary serum phenytoin
concentrations should be monitored and reduction in
the phenytoin dosage may be required.

Antidepressants/
Increased plasma concentrations of phenothiazines and
antipsychotic agents
increased muscarinic effects with tricyclics.
(8, 54-59)
Tricyclics/phenothiazines Neuroleptic drugs inhibit the metabolism of tricyclic
antidepressants in man. Labelled studies with
imipramine and nortriptyline showed that excretion of
imipramine is diminished while patients were treated
concomitantly with perphenazine, haloperidol or
chlorpromazine, though not during treatment with
flupenthixol. Perphenazine caused decrease of total
urinary excretion of nortriptyline, decreased levels of
metabolites in plasma and increased plasma levels of
unchanged drugs (56).

Combined treatment with neuroleptics and tricyclic
antidepressants has been recommended in several
clinical reports (57) .Tricyclics and phenothiazines are

DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA AND RELATED PSYCHOSES

Combination

287

Interaction

prescribed together in fixed combination, e.g. Motival
(nortriptyline plus fluphenazine) and in these doses
they do not normally present interaction problems.

Concomitant antipsychotic drugs (16-64 mg
perphenazine daily; 6 and 20 mg haloperidol daily, or
12 mg thiothixene daily) given to depressed hospital inpatients receiving desipramine (2.5 mg/kg showed a
two- to three-fold increase in plasma mean steady-state
desipramine levels when compared with control
patients on desipramine alone. Four patients on
combined drugs had severe CNS side effects and
urinary retention; each had a desipramine plasma
concentration in excess of 200 ng/ml (58). Four
patients with schizo-affective depression or residual
schizophrenia with depression were stabilized on
neuroleptic medications of fluphenazine decanoate
(12.5 mg/week im) and benztropine mesylate (2 mg
tid), and then given oral imipramine 300 mg daily,
following dose titrations over 16 days. In this 6-week
clinical trial the combined plasma concentrations of
imipramine/desipramine were 189-820 ng/ml (mean
551 ng/ml) on day 21, and 365-2181 ng/ml (mean
850 ng/ml) on day 42. These levels exceeded the
therapeutic threshold of 180 ng/ml for combined
imipramine/desipramine concentration.

Interaction between neuroleptics and tricyclic
antidepressants involves competition for the
cytochrome P450 enzyme system which metabolizes
both types of compound in the liver. Imipramine has a
half-life of 15-20 hr, and an approximate steady state
is expected after 5 days’ treatment on a standard dose.
None of the four patients involved showed a steady
state on day 21, in fact two patients showed substantial
increases in their imipramine : desipramine ratios
between days 21 and 42. This, together with a lower
mean combined concentration of the
hydroxymetabolites, was suggestive of impaired hepatic
metabolism of imipramine, especially since there is no

288

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antidepressants1
antipsychotic agents
cont.

documented evidence of competitive enzyme inhibition
between benztropine and tricyclics (59).

MAOUphenothiazines
(70-71)

This combination may lead to hypertension and
increased extrapyramidal reactions. The mechanism of
this interaction is not known; it is possible that MAOIs
inhibit the metabolism of phenothiazines.

MAOUclozapine (22)

Clozapine enhances the CNS effects of MAOIs

SSRI/haloperidol

Fluoxetine increases plasma concentration of
haloperidol and increased incidence of extrapyramidal
side effects.

MAOUoxypertine
(61, 62)

CNS excitation and hypertension caused by this
combination.
Some sources have recommended that, since
oxypertine has been observed in animal studies to
release small amounts of catecholamines, it should be
avoided in patients taking MAOIs.
This is a theoretical interaction which does not seem to
have been reported as being a clinical problem.
Although MAOI-adrenaline interaction is likely to be
less of a problem than interaction with indirectly acting
sympathomimetic agents, there still remains a need for
caution when these drugs are used concurrently. It
would be wise therefore not to give oxypertine with
MAOIs, or within 3 weeks of the use of MAOIs (62).

Antidiabetic agents1
phenothiazines
(6, 11, 22, 63)

Hypoglycaemic effect of sulphonylureas is reduced.
Phenothiazines have been reported to cause
hyperglycaemia; their mechanism of action in this
respect is unknown. No data are available regarding
their effects on the control of diabetes, but they should
obviously be used with care in the presence of
stabilized diabetic treatment.
Check frequently for continued diabetic control.

DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA AND RELATED PSYCHOSES

Combination

289

Interaction

Antihistamines/
antipsychotics (60)

Increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias with
astemizole and terfenadine when taken by patients on
long-term antipsychotic therapy.

Antihypertensives/
antipsychotic agents

In general, antipsychotic drugs as a group tend to
enhance the hypotensive effect of antihypertensive
agents.
High doses of chlorpromazine antagonize the
hypotensive effect of adrenergic neurone blockers.

Methyl dopa/
phenothiazines and
haloperidol (10)

Methyl dopa increases the risk of extrapyramidal side
effects with phenothiazines and other antipsychotic
agents including haloperidol.

Adrenergic neuroneblocking agent/
phenothiazine (6, 8, 10,
11, 64-69)

Reports conflict as to the nature of this interaction. On
the one hand, it has been suggested that
phenothiazines inhibit the uptake of guanethidine into
the adrenergic neurone and thus antagonize its
antihypertensive action. This opinion is based upon
reports describing several patients on guanethidine
who developed exacerbation of their hypertension
several days after chlorpromazine was started.
Haloperidol and thiothixene also seemed to reverse the
effects of guanethidine (64-67). There is a further
report of an adrenergic neurone-blocking
drug/chlorpromazine interaction in one patient (68).
On the other hand, the phenothiazines are reported to
potentiate the effects of guanethidine and other
hypotensive drugs (69).

Clonidine/phenothiazines The hypotensive effect of clonidine may be neutralized
pericyazine (11)
by pericyazine and other drugs in this class.
Corticosteroids/
phenothiazine (1, 2)

Chlorpromazine reduces gut motility and may enhance
the absorption of corticosteroids.

Desferrioxamine/
phenothiazines
(6, 7, 11)

This combination causes a transient metabolic
encepholopathy, characterized by loss of consciousness
for 48-72 hr.

290

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Digoxin/phenothiazines
(1,2)

Chlorpromazine reduces gut motility and may enhance
the absorption of digoxin.

Disulfiram/
Perphenazine (62)

A psychotic patient was discharged from hospital
stabilized on perphenazine (PPZ) (8 mg bid); he was
re-admitted 4 weeks later as an emergency after
starting treatment with disulfiram. At that time his
plasma PPZ concentration was subtherapeutic (1
nmol/l). His dosage of PPZ was doubled without
improving his psychotic symptoms but changes in route
of dosage to im PPZ enanthate (50 mg/week) resulted
in a substantial improvement and an increase in PPZ
concentrations to a therapeutic 1evel.It would appear
that disulfiram activates the liver enzymes so much that
PPZ by mouth is biotransformed into inactive
metabolites; parenteral administration of PPZ avoids
the ‘first pass’ effect in the liver.

Food/antipsychotic
agents (17-21)

Phenothiazines can be precipitated by many fruit
juices, milk, tea and coffee (17). The mixtures are
rendered unpalatable and some of the precipitates do
not redissolve in hydrochloric acid and so might be
expected to be only poorly absorbed in vivo. On this
basis it has been variously suggested that tea or coffee
might antagonize the efficacy of antipsychotic drug use,
especially neuroleptic drugs (18, 19). Support for these
views has been given by the results of experiments in
rats which suggest that coffee and tea alter the
pharmacokinetics of neuroleptic drugs (20). However,
in a controlled study in 16 female patients in a
psychiatric hospital, the effect of coffee or tea drinking
was investigated on steady-state blood levels and
clinical efficacy of chlorpromazine, haloperidol,
fluphenazine and trifluoperazine (21).Withdrawal of
these beverages did not increase the bioavailability of
the drugs studied, nor did they affect the individual
variation in the plasma levels of these drugs. It was
concluded that limitation of coffee or tea intake in
medicated psychiatric patients could not be justified
(21).
It is appreciated, however, that excessive intake of tea

DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA AND RELATED PSYCHOSES

Combination

291

Interaction

or coffee could by their pharmacological effects upset
stabilized medication with psychotropic drugs (24).
Levodopa/antipsychotic
agents (14, 16)

Phenothiazines, butyrophenones and thioxanthenes
interfere with central amine mechanisms; combinations
with levodopa should therefore be avoided where
possible. Phenothiazines may reduce the effects of
levodopa. Phenothiazines can cause parkinsonism in
their own right.
It should also be noted that some antihistamines are
phenothiazine derivatives (e.g. promethazine,
dimethothiazine, methdilazine, trimeprazine) and
might therefore be expected to diminish the effects of
levodopa if given concomitantly.

Lithium/antipsychotic
agents (3, 25-33)

Concomitant administration of lithium carbonate and
chlorpromazine in normal subjects reduced peak
plasma chlorpromazine concentrations to 59.7% of
levels with chlorpromazine alone. Area under
chlorpromazine concentration-time curve was 26.6%
smaller when lithium was taken as well.
Since antimanic effects of lithium carbonate may be
delayed for 7-10 days after starting treatment,
chlorpromazine has been given concurrently for earlier
control of manic behaviour. This interaction, however,
could explain inadequate responses to therapeutic
doses of chlorpromazine. It also explains why there
may be sudden onset of chlorpromazine toxicity when
lithium is withdrawn. Use such a combination with
caution.
Lithium appears to potentiate the neurological
complications produced by haloperidol or vice versa.
The combination has been reported to be complicated
by a toxic neurological reaction manifested by rigidity,
ataxia and tardive oral dyskinesia (25).Doses of more
than 40 mg of haloperidol daily should be avoided
when used in combination with lithium.
Existing neuroleptic drug regimens (haloperidol or
phenothiazines) in patients with Huntington’s chorea

292

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Lithium/antipsychotic
agents cont.

Interaction

seemed to enhance the apparently beneficial response
to lithium (26-29). Lithium and phenothiazines are
individually liable to induce hyperglycaemia (30-33),
although clinical reports have shown a lack of effect of
lithium and neuroleptic drug combinations on blood
glucose concentrations (33). Lithium has also been
reported to be excreted more rapidly during
concomitant treatment with chlorpromazine (34).

Although it may be necessary to administer
haloperidol concurrently with lithium in patients
suffering from mania or schizoaffective disorders, this
combination should only be used with caution. It is
advisable to monitor the clinical state of the patient
more frequently when administering mixed doses of
haloperidol and lithium (35). Concomitant
administration of neuroleptic drugs together with
lithium may enhance the beneficial response to lithium
in choreiform patients. Lithium-neuroleptic drug
combinations do not appear specifically to influence
blood sugar levels, although the possibility of an
idiosyncratic effect of lithium on blood glucose has
been suggested (33).

Lithium/clozapine (22)

Concomitant use of clozapine and lithium increase the
risk of development of neuroleptic malignant syndrome
which is potentially fatal and presents with
hyperpyrexia, muscle rigidity, altered mental status,
and evidence of autonomic instability.

MetocIopramide/
phenothiazines (8)

Concomitant use of phenothiazines and
metoclopramide has a greatly increased risk of
producing extrapyramidal effects.

Miscellaneous drugs
affecting ADH
secretion/antipsychotic
agents (36)

A drug-induced syndrome of inappropriate secretion of
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) has been described
secondarily to cyclophosphamide or vincristine
therapy. There are other reports on this syndrome

DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA AND RELATED PSYCHOSES

293

Combination

Interaction

amitriptyline (37)
carbamazepine (38)
chlorpropamide (39-44)
clofibrate (45)
cyclophosphamide (46)
diuretics (47)
fluphenazine (48)
haloperidol (49)
thioridazine (49)
thiothixene (50)
vinblastine (51)
vincristine (52, 53)

complicating chlorpropamide therapy both in patients
with diabetes mellitus (39-41) and in patients with
diabetes insipidus (42-44). The syndrome has also
been described as occurring with amitriptyline,
carbamazepine, clofibrate, diuretics, fluphenazine,
haloperidol, thiothixene, thioridazine and vinblastine.
Combination of any of these drugs might be expected
to increase the likelihood of the syndrome occurring
with resulting water retention and natriuresis.
Treatment with any combination of these drugs should
be used with caution and the syndrome of water
intoxication should be borne in mind when any patient
presents with symptoms of drowsiness, headache,
anorexia, nausea, vomiting, depression and confusion.

Oral contraceptives/
antipsychotic agents (72,
73)

Oestrogen-containing oral contraceptives may
potentiate phenothiazine-stimulated prolactin
secretion, resulting in mammary hypertrophy and
galactorrhoea.

Skeletal Muscle
Relaxantdantipsychotic
agents (76-78)

There is some evidence that the phenothiazines lower
serum and erythrocyte cholinesterase levels.
Methotrimeprazine has been reported to prolong
tubocurarine-induced muscle relaxation, and the
possibility of interaction with suxamethonium has been
suggested. Promazine has been shown to give rise to
prolonged apnoea when administered during surgery to
a patient who had received suxamethonium.
Phenothiazines should be administered with caution to
patients who have received suxamethonium.

Plastic intravenous
delivery systems/
phenothiazines (75)

REFERENCES

The loss of 45 drugs (including chlorpromazine
hydrochloride, promazine hydrochloride, thioridazine
hydrochloride and trifluoperazine dihydrochloride)
during simulated infusions through plastic infusion sets
has been attributed to sorption processes.

1 Forrest FM et al. (1970) Biol Psychiat 2, 53.
2 Lader M. (1977) In: Smith DGG (ed) Drug Interactions, London, Macmillan, pp. 15970.

294

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

3 Rivera-Calimlim L et al. (1978) Clin Pharmacol Ther 23, 451.
4 British National Formulary (1995) Number 29, Section 4.2 and Appendix 1British Medical
Association and The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain (1995) London.
5 Lawson DH, Lowe GDO. (1977) A m J Hosp Pharm 34, 1225.
6 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1271-72 (pipothiazide palmitate).
7 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
338 (desferrioxamine) .
8 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
843-6 (zuclopenthixol).
9 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
409 and 1704 (sulpiride).
10 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
680-84 (haloperidol).
11 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium, (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1260-61 (pericyazide).
12 Petrie JC et al. (1975) In: Cluff LE, Petrie JC (eds) Clinical Effects of Interaction between
Drugs, Amsterdam, Excerpta Medica, p. 251.
13 Kosterlitz HW. (1975) In: Cluff LE, Petrie JC (eds) Clinical Effects oflnteraction between
Drugs, Amsterdam, Excerpta Medica, p. 231.
14 Barbeau A. (1969) Can Med Assoc J 101, 791.
15 Editorial. (1970) Br Med J 1, 446.
16 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
324, 1860 (levodopa).
17 Lever PG, Hague JR. (1964) A m J Psychiat 120, 100.
18 Kulhaneck F et al. (1979) Lancet ii, 1130.
19 Hirsch SR. (1979) Lancet ii, 1130.
20 Kulhaneck F, Linde OK (1981) Lancet ii, 360.
21 Bowen S et al. (1981) Lancet i, 1218.
22 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium, (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1376-78 (clozapine).
23 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1019-29 (loxapine).
24 Bezchlibnyk KZ, Jeffries JJ. (1981) Can Med Assoc J 124, 357.
25 Loudon JB, Waring H. (1976) Lancet ii, 1088.
26 Dalen P. (1972) Lancet i , 107.
27 Mattsson B. (1973) Lancet i, 718.
28 Manyam NVB, Bravo-Fernandez E. (1973) Lancet i, 1010.
29 Schenk G , Leijnse-Ybema HJ. (1974) Lancet i, 364.
30 Zall H et al. (1968) Am J Psychiat 125, 549.
31 Johnston BB. (1977) Lancet ii, 935.
32 Craig J et al. (1977) Lancet ii, 1028.
33 King DJ. (1978) Br J Clin Pharmacol6, 436.
34 Sletten I et al. (1968) Curr Ther Res 8, 441.
35 Chose K. (1977) Br J Hosp Med 18, 578.
36 Hamilton DV. (1978) Practitioner 220, 469.
37 Luzecky MH et al. (1974) South Med J 67, 495.
38 Rado JP. (1973) Br Med J 3, 479.
39 Hayes JS, Kaye M. (1972) Am J Med Sci 263, 137.
40 Troyer A de, Demanet JC. (1976) Q J Med 45, 521.
41 Nisbet P. (1977) Br Med J 1, 904.
42 Webster B, Bain J. (1970) J Clin Endocr 30, 215.
43 Cinotti GA et al. (1972) Postgrad Med J 48, 107.

DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF SCHIZOPHRENIA AND RELATED PSYCHOSES

295

44 Piters K. (1976) J Clin Endocr 43, 1085.
45 Moses AM et al. (1973) J Clin Invest 52, 535.
46 DFronzo R A et al. (1973) A n n Intern Med 78, 861.
47 Fichman MP et al. (1971) A n n Intern Med 75, 853.
48 Rivera JL de. (1975) Ann Intern Med 82, 811.
49 Matuk F, Kalyanaraman K. (1977) Arch Neurol34, 374.
50 Aijouni K et al. (1974) Arch Intern Med 134, 1103.
51 Ginsberg SJ et al. (1977) N Engl J Med 296, 941.
52 Fine RN et al. (1966) Am J Dis Child 112, 256.
53 Hagen GA, Frawley TF. (1969) J Lab Clin Med 74, 881.
54 Witton K. (1965) Am J Psyciat 121, 185.
55 Warnes H et al. (1967) Can Med Assoc J 96, 112.
56 Gram LF, Overo KF. (1972) Br Med J 1, 463.
57 Davis JM et al. (1970) In: Psychopharmacology, A Review of Progress 1957-67, Washington, Pub1 Hlth Serv Publication.
58 Nelson JC, Jatlow PI. (1980) Am J Psychiat 137, 1232.
59 Siris SG et al. (1982) Am J Psychiat 139, 104.
60 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
888 (terfenadine).
61 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1442 (oxpertine).
62 Haneh LB, Larsen NE. (1982) Lancet ii, 1472.
63 Arneson G. (1964) J Neuropsychiat 5 , 181.
64 FDA. (1970) Report of Suspected Adverse Reactions to Drugs, NO 700201-056 00101.
65 Fann WE et al. (1971) Lancet ii, 436.
66 Medical News. (1972) J A M A 220, 1288.
67 Davis JM et al. (1973) Am J Psychiat 130, 808.
68 Starr KJ, Petrie JC. (1972) Br Med J 4, 133.
69 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin. (1967) 5 , 89.
70 Goldberg LI. (1964) J A M A 190, 456.
71 British National Formulary (1997) No, 33. Appendix 1. British Medical Association and
The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London.
72 Oral Contraceptives. (1974) Bulletin Vol 5, No 3 Health Protection Branch Department
of Health and Welfare, Canada.
73 Fletcher AP. (1986) In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP (eds) Iatrogenic Disease, 3rd ed, Oxford,
Oxford University Press, pp. 382099.
74 Kutt F, McDowell F. (1968) J A M A 203, 969.
75 Kowaluk E A et al. (1982) Am J Hosp Pharm 39, 460.
76 LevopromeR (1966) cited in Product Information, Lederle Laboratories.
77 Sphire RD. (1964) Anesth Analg Curr Res 43, 690.
78 Regan AG, Aldrete JA. (1967) Anesth Analg Curr Res 46, 315.
79 Vincent FM. (1980) A n n Intern Med 93, 56.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

4.2 INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS
USED IN THE TREATMENT OF
DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS
Drugs used in the treatment of depressive illness can be classified into three main
groupings (1) monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), (2) tricyclic antidepressants
and related compounds; and (3) selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) .
Finally, there is a small group of active substances that are used in the treatment
of depressive illness that can be placed together as (4) miscellaneous.
1. MA01 ANTIDEPRESSANTS
INN name:
Iproniazid phosphate
Isocarboxazid
Mebanazine
Moclobemide
Nialamide
Phenelzine sulphate
Tranylcypromine sulphate
Pargyline
Uses
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) by inhibiting monoamine oxidase cause an
accumulation of amine neurotransmitters. The metabolism of some amine drugs,
such as indirect acting sympathomimetic amines, is also inhibited and their pressor
effect may be potentiated. The pressor effect of tyramine in cheese, yeast extracts,
fermented soya bean products, beers, Chianti and other red and white wines, and
pickled herrings is dangerously potentiated.
Monamine oxidase inhibitors are now used much less frequently than tricyclic
antidepressants and SSRIs because of the dangers of dietary and other drug interactions.
Phobic patients, depressed patients with atypical, hypochondriacal or hysterical
features are said to respond best to MAOIs.
Most MAOIs bind irreversibly to monoamine oxidase sub-types A and B so that
the enzyme is inactivated, reversal of the MA01 effect only occurs when new
enzymes are synthesized. Moclobemide is claimed to bind reversibly to monoamine
oxidase sub-type A and also to cause less potentiation of the pressor effects of

297

298

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

tyramine, but patients should nevertheless be advised to avoid tyramine-containing
foods.
Recorded Interactions
Corn bination

Interaction

MA01
antidepressant/alcohol
(1)

Hypertensive reactions may occur due to the tyramine
(or other pressor amine) content of some alcoholic
drinks, notably beers including alcohol-free and lowalcohol beers (2, 3) and wines. The belief that the
interaction with wine only occurred with rough red
wines of the Chianti type has been shown to be wrong.
Interactions may occur with both red and white wines
(2) *
Advise avoidance of all alcoholic beverages since it is
unlikely that the patient will be able to determine the
tyramine content of the drink.

MA01 antidepressant/
anaesthetic (4)

Anaesthesia may be potentiated. Vasopressor drugs in
local anaesthetic preparations (adrenaline,
noradrenaline) will interact to give hypertensive crisis.
Normally this does not present an anaesthetic problem;
however, phentolamine may have to be given.

MA01 antidepressant/
anticoagulant (5, 6)

MAOIs potentiate the anticoagulant action of
coumarins and may cause severe haemorrhage. This
interaction is due to inhibition of coumarin
metabolism.
Avoid this combination. If interaction occurs with
haemorrhage treat with vitamin K.

MA01 antidepressant/
antihypertensive agent
guanethidine,
methyldopa (7-9)

MAOIs may antagonize the hypotensive effects of
guanethidine and diminish those of methyldopa.
The use of these antihypertensive agents like that of
M A 0 1 is declining, but the interaction is of clinical
significance.

MA01
antidepressant/appetite
suppressant (9-13)
amphetamine sulphate

Phenylpropanolamine-containing appetite suppressants
have been available in the USA, UK and Australia
and are available as nasal decongestants.
All these appetite suppressants have an indirect
sympathomimetic activity; concomitant administration

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

Cornbination

299

Interaction

benzphetamine
hydrochloride
chlorphentermine
hydrochloride
dexamphetamine
sulphate
diethylpropion
hydrochloride
fenfluramine
hydrochloride
methylamphetamine
hydrochloride
phendimetrazine
tartrate
phenmetrazine
hydrochloride
phenmetrazine
theoclate
phentermine

may cause severe hypertensive episodes with
cerebrovascular accidents leading to hemiplegia, coma
and even death.
Hyperpyrexia may also be a complication of the
interaction. Severe hyperpyrexia has been reported
(18) within hours after the ingestion of
tranylcypromine 10 mg plus a capsule containing
dextro-amphetamine and amobarbital; fever 43°C
(109°F) was accompanied by agitation, hyperkinesis,
coma, opisthotonos and convulsions. The patient
responded to supportive measures and was discharged
without significant residua 20 days later. Cardiac
arrhythmias have also been reported from this type of
interaction. A considerable number of adverse
reactions, mainly hypertensive episodes, have been
reported in association with phenylpropanolaminecontaining appetite suppressants from Australia.
Appetite suppressants containing sympathomimetic
amines, particularly those containing
phenylpropanolamine, should not be given to a patient
being treated with a MA01 drug or within 2 weeks of
stopping such treatment. These agents would best be
regarded as obsolete.
Note: I n the event of hypertensive crisis use
phentolamine do not use any other antihypertensive
agent.

MA01
antidepressant/mazindol
(15)

Mazindol, an anti-obesity agent, does not inhibit
monoamine oxidase but potentiates the pressor action
of catecholamines. It can therefore be anticipated that
it will interact with MAOIs.
MA01 should not be given concomitantly with
mazindol. A month at least should be allowed between
stopping either of the agents and starting the other.

MA01 antidepressant/
barbiturate hypnotic
(16)

Potentiation of barbiturates can be expected.

MA01
antidepressant/caffeine
or other xanthine (17)

Patients on MA01 antidepressants may exhibit
hyperexcitability reactions including insomnia after
consuming caffeine- (or other xanthine-) containing

300

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

MA01
antidepressant/caffeine
or other xanthine cont.

medicines or beverages. Caffeine is a common
constituent of many proprietary analgesic preparations.

MA01
antidepressanthsulin
and antidiabetic agents
(18-24)

MAOIs enhance or prolong the hypoglycaemic
responses to both insulin and the sulphonylureas. It is
not known whether the biguanides and glymidine are
similarly affected, although this is a possibility since it
has been postulated that MAOIs interfere with the
compensatory adrenergic response to hypoglycaemia
(20) *

MA01 antidepressant/
anti-parkinsoniandrugs
(10,21)
benzhexol
hydrochloride
(trihexyphenidyl
hydrochloride USP)
benztropine mesylate
biperiden hydrochloride
or lactate
caramiphen
hydrochloride
chlorphenoxamine
hydrochloride
dicyclomine
hydrochloride
ethopropazine
hydrochloride
hyoscyamine sulphate
met hixene
hydrochloride
orphenadrine
hyrochloride or citrate
procyclidine
hydrochloride

MAOIs non-specifically inhibit liver microsomal
enzymes. This potentiates the action of coadministered anticholinergic agents, especially those
used in the treatment of parkinsonism.
MAOIs should be given with caution to patients
receiving anticholinergic drugs; the dosage of the latter
may have to be reduced. Dry mouth, blurred vision,
urinary hesitancy or retention and constipation would
be evidence of this interaction.

MA01
antidepressant/levodopa
(22, 23)

Severe headache, flushing of the face, hypertension or
hypertensive crisis may follow from the use of this
combination. It is likely that these adverse
cardiovascular effects are due to increased storage and
release of either, or both, dopamine and nor-

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

Combination

301

Interaction

adrenaline, In contrast, reports suggest that tricyclic
antidepressants, notably amitriptyline and imipramine,
are safe for patients on levodopa treatment for
parkinsonism (23, 24).
MA01
antidepressant/muscle
relaxant
Phenelzine/
suxamethonium (25)

Phenelzine sulphate has been reported to cause a
reduction in the level of plasma pseudocholinesterase.
Prolonged apnoea in a patient on phenelzine has been
reported after suxamethonium administration. There is
no evidence at present that other MAOIs affect
pseudocholinesterases.

MA01 antidepressant/
sympathomimetic
amines
(10, 11, 14, 26-35)
bronchodilators
adrenaline
ephedrine
isoetharine
isoprenaline
methoxyphenamine
methylephedrine
orciprenaline
phenylephrine
phenylpropanolamine
pseudoephedrine
rimiterol
salbutamol
terbutaline
e.g. nasal decongestants
ephedrine
hy droxyamphetamine
methoxamine
naphazoline
oxymetazoline
phenylephrine
phenylpropanolamine
pseudoephedrine
tetrah ydrozoline
tuaminoheptane
xylometazoline

Adrenergic effects are potentiated, resulting in severe
headache, hypertension or hypertensive crisis.
Cardiac arrhythmias and circulatory insufficiency may
result from this interaction with central excitation if
compounds pass the blood-brain barrier. Hyperpyrexia
may also occur, especially with tranylcypromine and
amphetamine-like compounds. This hyperpyrexia may
be accompanied by convulsions and coma. Deaths
have been reported from this type of interaction.
Indirectly acting sympathomimetic amines are
absolutely contraindicated in patients being treated
with a MA01 antidepressant or within 2 weeks of
stopping such treatment. It would be wise to avoid all
sympathomimetic amines in combination with MAOIs.
A patient being treated with phenelzine (15 mg tid.)
experienced a severe throbbing frontal headache 15
min after taking 32 mg of phenylpropanolamine
(component of Mucron) to alleviate ‘head cold’
symptoms. Blood pressure rose to 210/100 mmHg and
the patient was admitted to hospital with a suspected
subarachnoid haemorrhage (34).
In a further case of sudden severe headache, confirmed
as subarachnoid haemorrhage with the possibility of a
left posterior angiotensin communicating aneurysm,
phenelzine-phenylpropanolamine interaction was
implicated (35). Two other cases have been reported
(29) in which MA01 antidepressants and
phenylpropanolamine (slow-release dosage forms)
interacted to evoke severe headache or status

302

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

NB: some of the above
listed agents are in
non-prescription ëcold
remediesí
e. g . hypertensive agents
mephentermine
metaraminol
methoxamine
noradrenaline
oxedrine

epilepticus, but with only slight elevation of blood
pressure. A marked rise in blood pressure has been
shown experimentally using phenylpropanolamine
(free-form) in subjects taking MAOIs (33).
Treatment of interaction:
(i) a-adrenergic blocking drugs (e.g. phentolamine for
the hypertensive crisis.
Only in severe cases should
(ii) P-adrenergic blocking drugs (e.g. propranolol be
used for tachycardia and cardiac arrhythmias; or
(iii) chlorpromazine for CNS effects be considered
since both these agents themselves interact with
MAOIs.

MA01
antidepressan t/SSRI
antidepressant (36-40)

Fluoxetine has a half-life of 1-3 days and its active
metabolite norfluoxetine has a mean half life of 9.3
days.
At least 14 days should elapse between discontinuation
of a M A 0 1 and initiation of treatment with fluoxetine.
At least 5 weeks should elapse if fluoxetine has been
prescribed chronically or at high dose between
discontinuation and initiation of M A 0 1 treatment.
Serious and fatal reactions including hyperthermia,
rigidity, myoclonus autonomic instability, delirium and
coma have been reported with concomitant use of
SSRI and MAOI, or when an inadequate interval has
been allowed between stopping one treatment and
starting the other. Similar advice is given for
fluvoxamine, paroxetine and sertraline.

MA01
antidepressant/tricyclic
antidepressant (41-51)
e.g. amitriptyline
butriptyline
clomipramine
desipramine
dibenzepin
dothiepin
doxepin
imipramine
iprindole

Although reports of interactions between all MAOIs
with all the individual tricyclic antidepressants have not
been made, there is adequate evidence to consider that
this is a generally undesirable and hazardous
combination. Flushing, sweating, excitability, muscle
twitching, tremor, rigidity and opisthotonos, clonic and
tonic convulsions, hyperpyrexia, loss of consciousness,
coma and ultimately death appear to be the general
course in the worst cases. The mechanism involved in
this interaction is thought to be a MAOI-induced block
of enzymes normally metabolizing the tricyclic
compounds.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

Combination

303

Interaction

maprotiline
nortriptyline
opipramol
protriptyline
tofenacin
trimipramine
viloxazine

Normally absolute contraindication: severe reactions
may result from the concomitant administration of
these antidepressants and from commencement of
tricyclic antidepressant therapy within 2 weeks of
stopping MA01 drugs. However, some psychiatrists
have maintained that combined MAOI-tricyclic
treatment is often effective when either group alone
has failed, and that with care in regulating dosage,
severe reactions can be avoided (52-54).

Phenelzinehmipramine
(60)

An 18-year-old in-patient treated for anorexia nervosa
with phenelzine (30 mg bid) and trimipramine (150 mg
at night) experienced an adverse reaction featuring
hypothermia when imipramine 150 mg was substituted
for trimipramine. She developed nausea, loss of
reality, was mentally impaired, disorientated, restless,
with an axillary temperature of 37.8"C, while her skin
was pale, cold and cyanosed. Her pupils were dilated;
she was hypertonic and displayed extensor plantar
reflexes. She improved and recovery was uneventful.
This combination is contraindicated.

MA01 antidepressant/
tryptophan (56, 57)

There have been several case reports of reactions
similar to the serotonin syndrome in patients receiving
MAOIs together with tryptophan, i.e. a reaction
characterized by drowsinness, unsteadiness,
hyperreflexia and ataxia. The patient appearing to be
inebriated.
If tryptophan is added to a patient on a MA01 it is
advisable to commence dosage at 0.5 g/day and
gradually increase the dose over several weeks to the
routine dose of 6.0 g/day. Such treatment should be
initiated in hospital (58). Controlled trials of
tryptophan with tricyclic antidepressants have
produced equivocal results (59).

MA01 antidepressand
tyramine- (or other
pressor amine-)
containing foodstuffs

Tyramine acts as an indirectly acting sympathomimetic
amine. Hypertensive episodes may occur (see previous
entry in this section on interactions with
sympathomimetic amines). Fatalities have been

304

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

(12, 26, 46, 60-77)
e.g. tyramine-containing
avocado pears (74)
broad-bean pods
beers, including
alcohol free or
low-alcohol beers
( 2 , 3)
Bovril
canned figs
caviar (75)
unprocessed cheese
(especially
Cheddar
and Gruybre)
Chianti, red and
white wines and
sherry
game
New Zealand prickly
spinach
(Tetragonia
tetragonoides) (76)
pickled herring
yeast products
(including
Marmite)
e.g. serotonincontaining
bananas (17)

reported with some of these drug-food interactions
(notably with cheese).
Patients on MA01 antidepressants must be advised on
diet and warned to avoid consuming foods known to
be rich in tyramine (or other pressor amine) content.
Note: the a-blocking drug phentolamine is of value in
the treatment of hypertensive episodes.

2. TRICYCLIC, POLYCYCLIC AND OTHER ANTIDEPRESSANTS
INN Name:
Amitriptyline hydrochloride
Amoxapine
Butriptyline hydrochloride
Citalopram hydrobromide
Clomipramine hydrochloride
Desipramine hydrochloride
Dibenzepin hydrochloride
Dothiepin hydrochloride

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

305

Doxepin hydrochloride
Imipramine hydrochloride
Iprindole hydrochloride
Lofepramine hydrochloride
Maprotiline hydrochloride
Mianserin hydrochloride
Nomifensine maleate
Nortriptyline hydrochloride
Opipramol hydrochloride
Protriptyline hydrochloride
Tofenacin hydrochloride
Trazodone hydrochloride
Trimipramine maleate
Viloxazine hydrochloride

The early compounds in this class all had a three-ring structure, however the title
is now a misnomer as there are now 1-, 2-, 3- and 4-ring structures with broadly
similar properties. These drugs are most effective for treating moderate to severe
endogenous depression.
Agitated and anxious patients tend to respond best to the sedative compounds,
whereas those that are withdrawn and apathetic to the less sedating compounds.
Tricyclic antidepressants with sedative properties include amitriptyline, mianserin,
trazodone and trimipramine. Less sedative agents include amoxapine, desipramine,
imipramine, iprindole, lofepramine, nortriptyline, and viloxazine. Protriptyline has
a stimulant action.
Tricyclic antidepressants are also effective in the management of panic disorders.
Oral and facial pain may respond to tricyclic antidepressants.
Tricyclic antidepressants may also be used in the treatment of nocturnal enuresis
in children and have a role in the treatment of anorexia nervosa.
The mechanism of action of the polycyclics and the related compounds is complex
and multidrectional and by no means fully established. Current theories of antidepressant action circulate around: (i) amine re-uptake; (ii) monoamine oxidase inhibition; (iii) central histamine receptor blockage; and (iv) altered post-synaptic receptor sensitivity. The second of these theories is particularly interesting and it has
been advanced as a possibility since tricyclics such as amitriptyline and imipramine
do inhibit M A 0 activity in vitro. It may be possible that this is another aspect of
the mechanism underlying re-uptake inhibition since M A 0 is tightly bound to
mitochondria1 membrane. These theories are discussed fully in the excellent review
by King on developments in antidepressant medication (78).
CNS depressant drugs are related in chemical structure and are mainly dibenzazepine or dibenzo-cycloheptane derivatives; because of their structure they are
commonly known as tricyclic (polycyclic would be a better term), although they

306

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

might be more accurately classified according to their effect on biogenic amine reuptake, e.g.
~~

Selective
noradrenaline
re-uptake
inhibitors

Selective 5HT
re-uptake
inhibitors

Maprotiline+
Desipramine+
Viloxazine
Nizoxetine**

Clomipramine
Trazodone*
Citalopram

+

Noradrenaline
and dopamine
re-uptake
inhibitor

Weak or
non-re-uptake
inhibitors

No example
since removal
of Nomifensine

Doxepin'
Iprindole
Mianserin"
+

+Also anticholinergic; *5HT receptor antagonist; **Not in UK. Classification based

on King (79).
Iprindole (pramidole), tofenacin, trazodone and viloxazine have slightly different
chemical structures from typical tricyclic compounds, zimelidine was a bicyclic
compound (a pyridylallylamine derivative), but was removed from the UK market
in 1983 and maprotiline and mianserin have a tetracyclic structure. Nomifensine
had an unusual tetrahydroisoquinoline structure but like the tricyclics it blocked
noradrenalineuptake and dopamine re-uptake; this latter unique property had led
to trials in parkinsonism but without success. It was removed from the UK market
in 1986. All these compounds, however, have similar uses to those of the classic
tricyclic antidepressants and it is convenient, if not strictly accurate, to continue to
classify them under this general heading.

Side Effects
Arrhythmias and heart block may follow the use of tricyclic antidepressants, particularly amitriptyline, and may be a factor in the sudden death that may occur with
these compounds

Blood dyscrasias: these agents have been reported to cause blood dyscrasias, particularly mianserin. In the case of mianserin a full blood count is recommended every
4 weeks during the first three months of treatment.
Convulsions: maprotiline has been associated with convulsions. Overdosage with
amoxapine has been associated with seizures.
Tardive dyskinesia: amoxapine has been reported to cause tardive dyskinesia.
Malignant neuroleptic hyperpyrexia: amoxapine has been reported to be associated
with this potentially fatal syndrome which is characterized by hyperpyrexia, muscle
rigidity.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

307

Endocrine changes: amoxapine has been reported to cause increased prolactin
secretion, breast enlargement and galactorrhoea in women.
Epilepsy: tricyclic and related antidepressants lower the convulsive threshold and
should be prescribed with extreme caution in epileptics.
Glaucoma, urinary retention, ileus: the tricyclic compounds possess cholinergic
blocking activity as well as 0-adrenergic blocking activity; they therefore produce
enhanced effects in patients receiving atropine-like anticholinergics, antihistamines,
phenothiazines (tranquillizers and antihistamines) and anti-parkinsonian drugs. The
mechanism involves additive effects at receptor sites, and the consequences of this
type of interaction are significant in the geriatric patient who is prone to glaucoma,
urinary retention and adynamic ileus.
Hepatic damage: mianserin has been reported to cause liver damage and jaundice.
Priapism: trazodone has been associated with priapism.

Drug Interactions
Combination

Interaction

Tricyclic
An enhanced cardivascular effect may occur due to the
antidepressant/adrenaline tricyclic drug inhibiting the uptake of noradrenaline
and noradrenaline
into sympathetic neurones. Hazardous cardiovascular
(50, 80-85)
effects in the form of arrhythmias and dysrrhythmias
may occur in patients receiving adrenaline or
noradrenaline in local anaesthetic formulations used in
dentistry (86).
Treatment with tricyclic antidepressant drugs is a
contraindication to the use of adrenaline,
noradrenaline or other sympathomimetic amine (87).
This includes adrenaline or noradrenaline in local
anaesthetic formulations which should not be given
within 10 days of stopping tricyclic antidepressants.
Tricyclic antidepressant1 Enhanced sedation, inhibition of intestinal movement
alcohol (88-90)
and fatty changes in the liver are consequences of this
interaction. Ability to drive or operate machinery may
be grossly impaired. Patients being treated with
tricyclic antidepressants who take alcohol may show
both unusual and unexpected behavioural disorders.
These are usually most noticeable during the first few
days of tricyclic therapy (91).
Amitriptyline and alcohol are contraindicated in

308

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Tricyclic antidepressant/
alcohol cont.

patients who might perform hazardous tasks such as
driving or operating factory machinery (92).

Tricyclic antidepressant/
anticholinergic drugs
(93)
e.g. anti-emetic agents
(including proprietary
motion
sickness remedies)
antihistamines
atropine-like drugs
anti-parkinsonian drugs
orphenadrine
(mephenamine)
(94-97)

This combination results in additive anticholinergic
effects at the receptor site. Adverse effects are usually
minor (dry mouth, constipation, blurred vision, etc.)
however, in geriatric patients there is the danger of
precipitating urinary retention, acute glaucoma or
adynamic ileus.
The possibility of this interaction should be anticipated
especially in elderly patients. The danger of selfmedication with non-prescription motion sickness
remedies should be stressed.
Note: Promethazine, methdilazine, and trimeprazine are
phenothiazine derivatives and anticholinergic effects
may be more pronounced with combinations involving
these drugs.

Tricyclic
antidepressant/MAOI
antidepressant (41-51)

Although reports of interactions between all tricyclics
with individual M A 0 1 antidepressants have not been
made, there is adequate evidence to consider that this
is a generally undesirable and hazardous combination.
Flushing, sweating, excitability, muscle twitching,
tremor, rigidity and opisthotonos, clonic and tonic
convulsions, hyperpyrexia, loss of consciousness, coma
and ultimately death appear to be the general course
in worst cases. The mechanism involved in this
interaction is thought to be a MAOI-induced block of
enzymes normally metabolizing the tricyclic
compounds.
Avoid using tricyclics for at least 2 weeks after
stopping MAOI.

Tricyclic
antidepressant/SSRI
antidepressant (38, 97)

Fluoxetine increases the plasma levels of tricyclic
antidepressants due to inhibition of hepatic cytochrome
P4.50 11DS. Theoretically, this may lead to enhanced
tricyclic toxicity.

Tricyclic antidepressant/
antihistamine (102)

Antihistamines will augment the anticholinergic effects
of tricyclic antidepressants. The mechanism involves
additive effects at receptor sites. Adverse effects are
usually minor (dry mouth, constipation, blurred
vision,

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

Combination

309

Interaction

etc.); however, in geriatric patients there is the danger
of precipitating urinary retention, acute glaucoma or
adynamic ileus. N.B. promethazine, methdilazine and
trimeprazine are phenothiazine derivatives and
anticholinergic effects may be more pronounced with
combinations involving these.
With the newer non-sedating antihistamines there is an
increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias with
astemizole and terfenidine (13)

Tricyclic antidepressant/
antihypertensive agent
(50, 103-113)

Bethanidine, debrisoquine and guanethidine are
concentrated in adrenergic neurones by an active
uptake mechanism, and owe their hypotensive action
to this selective concentration. This uptake mechanism
is inhibited by tricyclic antidepressants.
Introduction of desipramine to clonidine treatment in a
controlled study led to loss of blood pressure control in
four out of five hypertensive patients (112)

Tricyclic
antidepressant/baclofen
(Lioresal) (117)

Nortriptyline and imipramine, separately, apparently
potentiated the antispastic effect of the skeletal muscle
relaxant, baclofen, in one patient. Prior treatment for
18 months with baclofen produced good relief of
spasticity and left the patient with sufficient muscle
tone to stand. However, 50 mg nortriptyline daily at
bed time after 6 days caused increasing weakness of
the legs and he was unable to stand. Muscle tone
returned after withdrawal of nortriptyline. Two weeks
later imipramine 75 mg daily caused the same loss of
muscle tone.

Tricyclic antidepressant/
barbiturate hypnotic
(118)

Barbiturates stimulate the metabolism of tricyclic
antidepressant drugs and thereby reduce their efficacy.
The tricyclic antidepressants may be ineffective in the
presence of barbiturates. If the barbiturates are
withdrawn the patient may become overdosed.
Management is to stop barbiturates and reduce
tricyclic dosage.

310

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Tricyclic
antidepressant/calcium,
channel blockers
e.g. amlodipine,
diltiazem, felodipine,
isradipine, nicardipine,
nifedipine, nimodipine,
verapamil

Diltiazem and verapamil increase plasma
concentrations of imipramine and possibly other
tricyclics (114).

Tricyclic antidepressant/
antiepileptic agents
(98-101)

Tricyclic antidepressants lower the convulsive threshold
and should be prescribed with extreme caution to
epileptics.

Tricyclic antidepressant/
H2-receptor-antagonists
cimetidine

Cimetidine is a known inhibitor of hepatic metabolism
of drugs, and symptoms of tricyclic toxicity have been
reported in patients receiving cimetidine concurrently
with either desipramine or imipramine (119). Elevated
tricyclic concentrations during combined therapy or
reductions in tricyclic concentrations after withdrawal
of cimetidine have been reported for imipramine (120)
and nortriptyline (121). Studies in healthy subjects
have also indicated increased bioavailability and/or
impaired hepatic metabolism of doxepin (122, 123) and
imipramine (124) during cimetidine therapy.
Adjustment of tricyclic dosage may be required if
cimetidine therapy is initiated or discontinued.
Ranitidine or a proton pump inhibitor, e.g.
omeprazole, may be preferred since neither alter the
pharmacokinetics of doxepin or imipramine (124).

Tricyclic
antidepressant/levodopa

Although tricyclic antidepressants have been used
safely with levodopa (23), hypertensive crises have
occurred in patients receiving amitriptyline or
imipramine with the peripheral dopa decarboxylase
inhibitor carbidopa (125, 126). Imipramine has also
been reported to impair the rate of levodopa
absorption, presumably due to its muscarinic
properties (127).

Tricyclic antidepressant/
antimalarial (115)

There is an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia
with halofantrine.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

311

Combination

Interaction

Tricyclic antidepressant/
antipsychotic drug (116)
e.g. perphenazine,
haloperidol, thiothixene

Interaction between neuroleptics and tricyclic
antidepressants involves competition for the
cytochrome P450 enzyme system, which metabolizes
both types of compounds in the liver.
Severe CNS side effects and urinary retention may be
precipitated.

Tricyclic antidepressant/
orphenadrine
(mephenamine) (94-96)
orphenadrine citrate
orphenadrine
hydrochloride

The anticholinergic effects of tricyclic antidepressants
and orphenadrine summate.
Enhanced side effects (dry mouth, constipation,
blurred vision) may be expected. The danger of
precipitating urinary retention, acute glaucoma or
adynamic ileus in elderly patients should not be
overlooked.

Tricyclic antidepressant/
sympathomimetic
amines (32, 85)

The pressor responses to sympathomimetic amines is
increased in patients receiving antidepressants. Even
the levels of noradrenaline in local anaesthetics have
produced fatal hypertensive crises.
Imipramine potentiates the action of isoprenaline. The
administration of imipramine (25 mg tid) to 10 chronic
asthmatic patients using isoprenaline aerosols gave
subjective improvement and increased peak expiratory
flow. Cardiovascular responses to isoprenaline were
also potentiated.

3. SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS (SSRIs)
INN name:
Fluvoxamine maleate
Fluoxetine
Paroxetine
Sertraline

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are indicated for the treatment of depressive
illness. Fluoxetine is also used in the treatment of bulimia nervosa, where the
recommended dosage is 60 as opposed to 20 mg/day initially for the treatment of
depressive illness.
Side Effects
Asthenia, fever, nausea, diarrhoea, dry mouth, appetite loss, dyspepsia, vomiting.

312

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Headache, nervousness, insomnia, tremor, dizziness, decreased libido with delayed
or inhibited orgasm (128, 129).
Hypomania or mania.
Dyskinesia with buccal-lingual-masticatory syndrome; movement disorders; worsening of pre-existing movement disorders including those associated with neuroleptic
drug; seizures.
Blood dyscrasias have been reported but causality has not been established.
Rashes, allergic reactions, angioneurotic oedema, urticaria.
SSRIs impair the ability to drive and operate machinery.
SSRIs have also been demonstrated in milk and should not be administered to
nursing mothers.
Withdrawal symptoms have been reported with paroxetine; it should not be discontinued abruptly (130).
The overall safety of SSRIs has been reviewed in depth by Mitchell (131).
Extent of Clinical Use
Fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, paroxetine and sertraline accounted for 0.09, 1.03, 0.77
and 0.48% of the cost of all NHS prescriptions written on FPlO or GPlO in the
United Kingdom in 1994 or 2.37% (f93 million) of the total FHSA medicines bill.
General Information
Fluvoxamine can prolong the elimination of drugs metabolized by oxidation in the
liver and interactions with warfarin phenytoin and theophylline can be clinically
significant. Paroxetine interacts with phenytoin to reduce plasma concentrations of
paroxetine. It may also interact with warfarin to produce increased bleeding in the
presence of unaltered prothrombin times. Sertraline is highly bound to plasma
proteins and may interact with other highly protein-bound drugs, such as digoxin,
phenytoin and warfarin (38).
Reported Drug Interactions (40, 132-134)
Combination

SSRI/Anticonvulsants

Interaction

The convulsive threshold is lowered by fluoxetine and
other SSRIs and epileptic fits have been precipitated in
patients whose epilepsy has previously been well
controlled. However, the plasma concentration of
carbamazepine and phenytoin are raised by
concomitant administration of fluoxetine and

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

Cornbination

313

Interaction

fluvoxamine. Phenytoin lowers the plasma
concentration of paroxetine.
SSRUAntidepressants
monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (36-40, 131)

Fluoxetine has a half life of 1-3 days and its active
metabolite norfluoxetine has a mean half-life of 9.3
days.
At least 14 days should elapse between discontinuation
of monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) and initiation
of treatment with fluoxetine. At least 5 weeks should
elapse if fluoxetine has been prescribed chronically or
at high dose between discontinuation and initiation of
MA01 treatment, Serious and fatal reactions including
hyperthermia, rigidity, myoclonus autonomic
instability, delirium and coma have been reported with
concomitant use of SSRI and MAOI, or when
inadequate interval has been allowed between stopping
one treatment and starting the other. Similar advice is
given for paroxetine and sertraline (135).

SSRI/Antidepressants
tricyclics
(38, 97, 136, 137)

Fluoxetine increases the plasma concentrations of
tricyclic antidepressants due to inhibition of hepatic
cytochrome P450 IIDS. Theoretically this may lead to
increased tricyclic toxicity.

SSRI/antiarrhythmic
agents (40)

Plasma concentrations of flecainide and encainide are
increased by fluoxetine and fluvoxamine (40).

SSRI/carbamazepine
(138)

The addition of fluvoxamine to a constant dose of
carbamazepine may lead to increased plasma levels
and carbamazepine intoxication (138).

SSRI/cyclosporin (162)

A 59-year-old patient underwent cardiac transplant for
end-stage heart failure. Cyclosporin was given as an
immunosuppressant, and he was maintained on 225 mg
twice daily, with a stable trough whole blood
concentration of 300 mg/l. Seventeen days postoperatively the patient developed acute depression and
was given the SSRI fluoxetine 20 mg once daily. After
10 days trough cyclosporin concentration had risen to
588 mg/l and the dose of cyclosporin was reduced to
75 mg twice daily. He did not respond to the SSRI
which was discontinued and trough cyclosporin level

314

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

SSRI/cyclosporin cont.

fell to 95 mg/l after 7 days, necessitating an increase in
cyclosporin dosage to 200 mg twice daily which once
again gave trough levels of 300 mg/l.

SSRI/dopaminergic
drugs (140, 141)

Hypertension and CNS excitation has been seen when
fluoxetine and other SSRIs have been given in
conjunction with selegiline, an irrevesible type B
selective MAOI, used in the treatment of parkinsonism
(140, 141).

SSRI/lithium
(37, 142-145)

Cases of lithium neurotoxicity with marked
somnolence and absence of seizures have been
reported to be induced by fluoxetine and fluvoxamine
given concomitantly with lithium salts (142-145). A
syndrome of convulsions and hyperpyrexia has also
been reported when SSRIs have been co-administered
with lithium salts (37). Frequent monitoring of lithium
plasma levels may be necessary.

SSRIs/phenytoin (146)

Fluoxetine inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
phenytoin and has been reported to raise plasma
phenytoin levels leading to neurotoxicity (146).

SSRUpropranolol (147)

Fluvoxamine interaction studies in man have shown
that co-administration with propranolol increases
propranolol blood levels.
A complete heart block occurred in a patient on
propranolol and fluoxetine (147).

SSRI/sumatriptan (148)

Concurrent administration of SSRI with the selective
antimigraine serotonin agent, sumatriptan, causes
increased risk of CNS toxicity (148). The combination
should be avoided.

SSRI/theophylline
(150, 161)

Plasma concentrations of theophylline are increased by
fluvoxamine. The pharmacokinetic interaction between
fluvoxamine and theophylline is due to potent
inhibition of CYPIA2 by fluvoxamine. The result is
potential theophylline toxicity (161). A toxic
interaction has been reported in a child (150).

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

315

Combination

Interaction

SSRUtryptophan (151)

SSRIs in animal studies have been shown to induce
“serotonin syndrome” comprizing restlessness,
agitation, severe gastrointestinal symptoms including
diarrhoea (151).
Fluoxetine if given with tryptophan in the treatment of
depression causes agitation and severe nausea (40).

SSRI/vinblastine (160)

Impaired metabolism of vinblastine and increased
toxicity (160).

SSRI/warfarin
(152, 153)

Fluoxetine and sertraline bind to plasma proteins;
fluoxetine has been reported to increase plasma
warfarin concentrations leading to excessive
anticoagulation (152, 153).
Fluoxetine has been demonstrated to increase bleeding
in warfarin treated patients in the presence of an
unaltered prothrombin times (134).

4. OTHER AGENTS
INN name:
Flupenthixol
Tryptophan
Flupenthixol is a neuroleptic of the thioxanthene series. It has antidepressant properties and, at the lowdoses of 1-3 mg/day used for this purpose, side effects are
less than with tricyclic antidepressants.
Tryptophan appears to benefit some patients with resistant depression. Tryptophan products were withdrawn from the European, USA and Japanese markets in
late 1989 following association with the eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome (154). They
have recently been reintroduced into the UK under carefully monitored conditions.

Recorded Interactions
Combination

Interaction

Flupenthixol/
antidepressants

Interactions at the low doses used in the treatment of
depression are not a clinical problem.

FlupenthixoU
antiparkinson agents

However, the anticholinergic effects of tricyclic
antidepressants and antiparkinsonian drugs may be
increased and tardive dyskinesia be precipitated (155).

316

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Flupenthixol/
antihypertensives

Flupenthixol antagonizes the blood pressure lowering
effects of adrenergic blocking agents such as
guanethidine, possibly also clonidine (155).

Flupenthixol/tea or
coffee

Support for a suggested interaction was given by
studies in rats which suggested that tea and coffee
altered the pharmacokinetics of neuroleptic drugs
(156). Additional support was given by in vitro studies
showing precipitation of the neuroleptic and the strong
complex formed with tannins (157); however, a
controlled trial in psychiatric patients failed to show
any effect of tea or coffee drinking on steady-state
blood levels and clinical efficacy of a number of
neuroleptics (158). However the psychotropic effects of
caffeinated drinks cannot be neglected (159).

Tryptophan/
antidepressants

CNS excitation and confusion with MAOIs.
Agitation and nausea with the SSRIs fluoxetine,
fluvoxamine, paroxetine and sertraline (40). Danger of
a ‘serotonin syndrome’ (151).

Recommended further reading
Brown C, Taniguchi G, Yip K. (1989) The monoamine oxidase inhibitor-tyramine interaction.
J Clin Pharmacol 29, 529-532.
D’Arcy PF. (1995) L-Tryptophan: eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome. Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 14, 37-43.
Henry JA, Alexander CA, Sener EK. (1995) Relative mortality from overdose of antidepressants. Br Med J 310, 221-224.
Isacsson G , Redfors I , Wasserman D , Bergman U. (1994) Choice of antidepressants; questionnaire survey of psychiatrists and general practitioners in two areas of Sweden. Br Med
J 309, 1546-159.
Jick SS, Dean AD, Jick H. (1995) Antidepressants and suicide. Br Med J 310, 215-8.
Medicines Resource Centre. (1992) New Medicines: Serotonin specific re-uptake inhibitors
(SSRIs). Znt Pharm J 6 , 6-9.
Mitchell PB. (1994) Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: adverse effects, toxicity and
interactions. Adverse Drug React Toxic01Rev 13, 121-144.
Rabkin JG, Quitkin FM, Harrison W, Tricamo E, McGrath P. (1984) Adverse reactions to
monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Part I: a comparative study. J Clin Psychopharmacol 4,
270-278.
Rabkin JG, Quitkin FM, McGrath P, Harrison W, Tricame E. (1985) Adverse reactions to
monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Part 11: treatment correlates and clinical management. J
Clin Psychopharmacol 5 , 2-9.
Richelson E . (1983) Antimuscarinic and other receptor-blocking properties of antidepressants. Mayo Clinic Proc 58, 40-46.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

317

REFERENCES

1 Sjovist F. (1965) Proc R SOCMed 58, 967.
2 Hannah P et al. (1988) Lancet i, 879.
3 Murray J A et al. (1988) Lancet i, 1167.
4 Dundee JW. (1974) Personal communication.
5 DeNicola P et al. (1964) Thromb Diath Haemorrh Suppl 12, 125.
6 Fumorola D et al. (1964) Haematologica 49, 1248.
7 Bazire S. (1989) Pharm J 236, 75.
8 Woods KL. (1989) Prescriberís J 29, 75.
9 Lippman SB, Nash K. (1990) Drug Safety 5, 195.
10 Goldberg LI. (1964) J A M A 190, 456.
11 Dally PJ. (1962) Lancet i, 1235.
12 Brown C. et al. (1989) J Clin Pharmacol29, 529.
13 Reynolds JEF (ed). (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th Edition, Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 269.
14 Krisko I et al. (1969) A n n Zntern Med 7 0 , 559.
15 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium, (1991-92) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1341.
16 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th Edn, Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 268.
17 Gradwell BG. (1960) Br Med J 2 , 1018.
18 Cooper AJ, Keddie KMG. (1964) Lancet i, 1133.
19 Cooper AJ, Ashcroft G . (1966) Lancet i, 407.
20 Cooper AJ, Ashcroft G. (1967) Diabetes 16, 272.
21 Shaw DM. (1964) Practitioner 192, 23.
22 Birkmayer W, Hornykiewicz 0. (1962) Arch Psychiatr Nervenkr 203, 560.
23 Hunter KR et al. (1970) Br Med J 3 , 388.
24 Hunter KR et al. (1970) Lancet ii, 1283.
25 Bodley PO et al. (1969) Br Med J 3 , 510.
26 Horwitz D et al. (1960) J Lab Clin Med 56, 747.
27 Low-Beer G, Tidmarsh D. (1963) Br Med J 2, 683.
28 Sherman M et al. (1964) Am J Psychiatry 120, 1019.
29 Tonks CM, Lloyds AT. (1965) Br Med J 1 , 589.
30 Mark LC et al. (1967) NYJ Med 67, 570.
31 Elis J et al. (1967) Br Med J 2 , 75.
32 Mattila AJ, Muittari A. (1969) A n n Med Zntern Fenn 57, 185.
33 Cuthbert MF et al. (1969) Br Med J 1, 404.
34 Mason AMS, Buckle RM. (1969) Br Med J 1, 845.
35 Humberstone PM. (1969) Br Med J 1 , 846.
36 Committee on Safety of Medicines. (1988) Curr Problems, NO 22.
37 Committee on Safety of Medicines. (1989) Curr Problems, NO 26.
38 Medicines Resource Centre. (1992) Znt Pharm J 6 , 6.
39 Seroxat Product Information, SmithKline Beecham 1992.
40 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium, (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
438.
41 Davies G . (1960) Br Med J 2 , 1019.
42 Singh H. (1960) Am J Psyciatry 117, 360.
43 Ayd FJJ. (1961) Neuropsychiat 2 (Suppl l ) , 119.
44 Howarth E. (1961) J Ment Sci 107, 100.
45 Kane FJ, Freeman D. (1963) Am J Psychiatry 120, 79.
46 Cuthill JM. et al. (1964) Lancet i, 1076.
47 Bowen LW. (1964) Br Med J 2 , 1465.

318

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

48 McCurdy LR, Kane FJ. (1964) Am J Psychiatry 121, 397.
49 Saunders JCJ. (1965) Kans Med SOC66, 471.
50 Hills NF. (1965) Br Med J 1, 859.
51 Lockett MF, Milner G. (1965) Br Med J 1, 921.
52 Gander DR. (1965) Br Med J 1, 521.
53 Gander DR. (1965) Lancet ii, 107.
54 Schuckit M et al. (1971) Arch Gen Psychiatry 24, 409.
55 Graham PM et al. (1982) Lancet ii, 440.
56 Pare CMB. (1963) Lancet ii, 527.
57 Price WA et al. (1986) J Clin Pharmacol26, 77.
58 Reynolds JEF (ed). (1989) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 29th Edn, Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 384.
59 Cutting J. (1990) Br Med J 301, 228.
60 Strong FM. (1962) Am J Clin Nutr 11, 500.
61 Blackwell B. (1963) Lancet ii, 414, 819.
62 Womack AM. (1963) Lancet ii, 463.
63 Davies EB et aI. (1963) Lancet ii, 691.
64 Honvitz D et al. (1964) J A M A 188, 1108.
65 Blackwell B, Marley E. (1964) Lancet i, 530.
66 Blackwell B et al. (1964) Lancet i, 722.
67 Leonard JW et al. (1964) Lancet i, 883.
68 Hodge JV. (1964) Lancet i, 1108.
69 Harper M. (1964) Lancet ii, 312.
70 Nuessle FW et al. (1965) J A M A 192, 726.
71 Marley E, Blackwell B. (1970) A d v Pharmacol Chemother 8 , 185.
72 Boulton AA et al. (1970) Can Med Assoc J 102, 1394.
73 Boakes AJ. (1971) Prescribers J 11, 109.
74 Generali JA et al. (1981) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 15, 903.
75 Isaac P et al. (1977) Lancet ii, 816.
76 Comfort A. (1981) Lancet ii, 472.
77 Peet M et al. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacol 11, 212.
78 King DJ. (1980) Irish Med J 73, 366.
79 King DJ. (1983) Irish Med J 76, 44.
80 Stone C A et al. (1964) J Pharmacol Exp Ther 144, 196.
81 Gillette JR. (1965) A n n N Y Acad Sci 123, 42.
82 Jori A et al. (1966) J Pharm Pharmacol 18, 824.
83 Jori A. (1968) J Pharm Pharmacol20, 862.
84 Barar FSK et al. (1971) Br J Pharmacol43, 472P.
85 Boakes AJ et al. (1972) Br Dent J 133, 137.
86 Boakes AJ et al. (1973) Br Med 1, 311.
87 Leading Article. (1972) Lancet ii, 584.
88 Zirkle GA et al. (1959) J A M A 171, 1496.
89 Landauer AA et al. (1969) Science 163, 1467.
90 Milner G. (1969) Med J Aust 2 , 153.
91 Griffin JP, D’Arcy PF. (1974) Prescriberís J 14, 55.
92 Scott DB et al. (1982) Psychopharmacology 76, 209.
93 Milner G, Hills NF. (1966) Br Med J 1, 841.
94 Clark TH et al. (1967) Patient Care 1, 841.
95 Hansten PD. (1969) Hosp Form Manag 4 , 25.
96 Martin EW. Hazards of Medication, Lippincott, Philadelphia, p. 486.
97 Brosen K. (1990) Clin Pharmacokinet 18, 220.
98 Kessell A et al. (1967) Med J Aust 54, 1194.
99 Betts TA et al. (1967) Lancet i, 390.

INTERACTIONSWITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS

319

100 Houghton AWJ. (1971) Lancet i, 138.
101 Dallos V, Heathfield K. (1969) Br Med J 4 , 80.
102 Evaluations of Drug Interactions. (1973) 1st edn, ; Am Pharm Assoc, Washington, p.
259.
103 Consumers’ Association (1967) Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin 5 , 89.
104 Leishman AWD. et al. (1963) Lancet i, 112.
105 White AG. (1965) Lancet ii, 441.
106 Gulati O D et al. (1967) J A M A 202, 973.
107 Mitchell JR et al. (1967) J A M A 202, 973.
108 Feagin OT et al. (1969) J Clin Invest 48, 23a.
109 Starr KJ, Petrie JC. (1972) Br Med 4 , 133.
110 Mitchell JR et al. (1970) J Clin Invest 49, 1596.
111 Briant RH, Reid JL. (1972) Br J Pharmacol46, 563P.
112 Briant R H et al. (1973) Br Med J 1, 522.
113 Connoly ME et al. (1969) In: Catapres in Hypertension, Butterworths, London, p. 167.
114 Hermann DJ et al. (1992) J Clin Pharmacol32, 176.
115 Consumers’Association. (1993) Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin 31, 59.
116 Nelson JC, Jatlow PI. (1980) Am J Psychiatry 137, 1232.
117 Silverglatt MJ. (1981) J A M A 246, 1659.
118 Burrows GD, Davies B. (1971) Br Med J 4 , 113.
119 Miller DD, Macklin M. (1983) Am J Psychiatry 140, 351.
120 Shapiro PA. (1984) Am J Psychiatry 141, 152.
121 Miller D D et al. (1983) Drug Intel1 Clin Pharm 17, 904.
122 Abernethy DR, Todd EL. (1986) J Clin Psychopharmacol6, 8 .
123 Sutherland DL et al. (1987) Eur J Clin Pharmacol32, 159.
124 Wells BG et al. (1986) Eur J Clin Pharmacol31, 285.
125 Rampton DS. (1977) Br Med J 2 , 607.
126 Edwards M. (1982) Practitioner 226, 1447.
127 Morgan JP et al. (1975) Neurology 25, 1029.
128 Weis AJ, Van Arsdalen KN. (1988) Urol Clin North Am 15, 23.
129 Dorevitch A , Davis H. (1994) A n n Pharmacother 28, 872.
130 Committee on Safety of MedicinedMedicines Control Agency. (1993) Curr Problems
19, 1.
131 Mitchell PB. (1994) Adverse Drug React Tonicol Rev 13, 121.
132 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
449.
133 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium, (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
670.
134 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1586.
135 Bhatara Vs, Bandetiini FC. (1993) Clin Pharm 12, 222.
136 Ciraulo DA, Shader RI. (1990) J Clin Psychopharmacol ; 10, 48.
137 Bertschy G et al. (1991) Eur J Clin Pharmacol ; 40, 119.
138 Fritze J et al. (1991) Acta Psychiatr Scand 84, 583.
139 Dursun M et al. (1993) Lancet 342, 442.
140 Suchowersky 0, De Vries JD. (1990) Can J Psychiatry 35, 571.
141 Jermain DM. (1992) A n n Psychiatr 26, 1300.
142 Salama AA, Shafey M. (1989) Am J Psychiatry 146, 278.
143 Noveske FG et al. (1989) Am J Psychiatry 146, 1515.
144 Austin LS et al. (1990) J Clin Psychiatry 51, 344.
145 Evans M, Marwick P. (1990) Br J Psychiatry 156, 286.
146 Jalil P. (1992) J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 55, 412.
147 Drake WM, Gordon GD. (1994) Lancet 343, 425.

320

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

148 Reynolds JEF (ed). (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, Pharmaceutical Press,
30th Edition, London, p. 417.
149 Committee on Safety of MedicinesIMedicines Control Agency. (1994) Curr Problems
20, 9.
150 Sperber AD. (1991) Drug Safety 6 , 460.
151 Sternback H. (1991) Am J Psychiatry 148, 705.
152 Claire RJ et al. (1991) Am J Psychiatry 148, 1604.
153 Woolfreys S et al. (1993) Br Med J 307, 241.
154 D’Arcy PF. (1995) Adverse Drug React Toxic01 Rev 14, 37.
155 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
851.
156 Kulhaneck F, Linde OK. (1981) Lancet ii, 359.
157 Lasswell WL et al. (1984) J Pharm Sci 73, 1056.
158 Bowen S et al. (1981) Lancet i, 1217.
159 De Frietas B, Schwartz G. (1979) Am J Psychiatry 136, 1337.
160 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
437-439.
161 Rasmussen BB, Maenpaa J, Pelkonen 0, Loft S et al. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol39,
151-159.
162 Horton RC, Bonser RS. (1995) Br Med J 311, 422.

4.3 DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH
LITHIUM SALTS
Lithium salts are used in the prophylaxis and treatment of mania, and in the
prophylaxis of manic depressive illness (bipolar illness or bipolar depression) and
in the treatment of recurrent depression (unipolar illness or unipolar depression).
Lithium treatment is unsuitable for children, Lithium therapy should never be
instituted where there are no facilities for regular monitoring of plasma lithium
levels which should not be allowed to exceed 1.3mmol Lif/l; and the normal
therapeutic range is between 0.4 and 1.0 mmol Lif/l.
Side effects of lithium treatment are related to dosage and to the degree of
accumulation in intracellular and extracellular body fluids; they are more common
during the first weeks of treatment and usually disappear when the dose is reduced
and include transient nausea, fine tremor and weakness. Polydipsia and polyuria
may occur and are thought to be due to interference by lithium of the activation
of cyclic 3’, 5’-AMP by the antidiuretic hormone (1-3). Lithium-induced diabetes
insipidus is a recognized complication and, under these circumstances, thiazide
diuretics can exert an antidiuretic effect and elevate plasma lithium levels and
produce intoxication. More serious effects are likely if the plasma lithium level
reaches 1.5 mmol Li+/l in which case treatment should be stopped immediately.
Symptoms and signs of lithium toxicity include ataxia, coarse tremor, confusion,
vomiting, diarrhoea, thirst and dryness of mouth, drowsiness and slurred speech.
Non-toxic goitre and impairment of thyroid function detectable by biochemical tests
but without clinical manifestations have been reported (4-7), as has also severe
hypothyroidism of rapid onset during a short course of lithium treatment (8); the
plasma-bound iodine level returned to normal after lithium was stopped.
Plasma concentrations in excess of 2.0 mmol Li+/l require emergency treatment
with forced diuresis or dialysis if severe lithium toxicity is to be avoided or minimized. Severe lithium intoxication results in coma with hyper-reflexia, muscle tremors, attacks of hyperextension of the limbs and occasionally epileptic seizures;
deaths have been reported.
The drug is contraindicated in heart failure, impaired renal function, Addison’s
disease and in conditions of disturbed sodium balance. It is suggested that it should
not be given during pregnancy; elderly patients may not tolerate lithium well and
adverse effects suggestive of neurotoxicity are currently causing much concern (9,
10). Over-reliance on frequent serum lithium determinations should be avoided
(10); the best way to avoid serious sequelae from neurotoxicity in the elderly patient
treated with lithium is to monitor the patient carefully and frequently for the signs
and symptoms of those disorders (10).

321

322

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Differentformulations of lithium vary widely in bioavailability, a change in formulation requires the same precautions as initiation of treatment. Patients stabilized on
a particular formulation and dosage should not have their formulation altered. This
is one circumstance where patients should be made aware of the differences between
brand names and the importance of adhering to one formulation, and doctors should
prescribe by brand name.
LITHIUM CARBONATE
The usual lithium salt given is lithium carbonate. The following formulations are
available on the UK market:
Camcolit
250 mg (6.8 mmol) and 400 mg (10.8 mmol)
450 mg (12.2 mmol)
Liskonium
Phasal
300 mg (8.1 mmol)
Priadel
200 mg (5.4 mmol) and 400 mg (10.8 mmol)
LITHIUM CITRATE
Li-liquid
509 mg/5 ml (5.4 mmoy5 ml)
Litarex
564 mg (6 mmol)
Priadel liquid
520 mg/15 ml (5.4 mmoy5 ml)
In France lithium preparations, such as lithium gluconate are additionally available, and in Germany lithium salts may be presented additionally as gluconate,
orotate, and acetate salts.
Combination

Interaction

Aminophylline
theophylline/lithium
(11-12)

Lithium excretion is increased and lithium serum levels
are reduced resulting in decreased efficacy of
treatment.

Antaciddlithium
(13-15)

Sodium bicarbonate increases the excretion of lithium
leading to lowering of plasma lithium levels and
reduced therapeutic efficiency (13). Antacids
containing combinations of aluminium and magnesium
hydroxides and dimethicone were without effect on the
in vitro dissolution (14) and the in vivo bioavailability
of lithium carbonate (15).

Antibacterials/lithium
metronidazole (16)

Two women experienced toxic reactions to long-term
lithium treatment following the brief use (1 week) of
metronidazole to treat vaginitis (16). In the first
patient, lithium blood levels and serum creatinine

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH LITHIUM SALTS

Combination

323

Interaction

levels were elevated and the patient complained of
polyuria and nocturia with a 24-hr urine volume of
6.8 1. Creatinine levels remained elevated (180 mmol/l)
for 5 months after metronidazole was stopped.
In the second case, serum sodium levels rose and the
patient became confused and needed assistance when
walking. Diagnosis of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
was made. Lithium was stopped but hypernatraemia
(up to 180 mmol/l) and abnormally dilute urine
(averaging 300 mOsm/l) continued for the next 6
months.

Spectinomycin (17, 18)

Lithium toxicity has been reported on isolated
occasions in patients receiving spectinomycin (17) and
tetracycline (18).

Tetracycline (18-20)

Two days after starting a course of long acting capsules
of tetracycline (250 mg tid (Terabid), a 30-year-old
woman, maintained on lithium carbonate sustainedrelease tablets (800 mg bid) and having a serum lithium
concentration of 0.5-0.84 mmol/l, experienced a sharp
rise in serum lithium to 1.7 mmol/l. Two days later it
rose to 2.74 mmol/l and the patient was drowsy, with
slurred speech and a fine tremor of the hands. She was
very thirsty. Her serum lithium fell slowly over the
next few days after the two drugs were withdrawn.
Interaction was attributed to the nephrotoxic effect of
tetracycline (18). In contrast, lithium and tetracycline
have been used concomitantly in many patients
without serious problems and, additionally, tetracycline
has been used to treat the acneform skin eruptions
induced by lithium (19). Lithium blood concentrations
were decreased rather than increased in healthy
subjects following addition of tetracycline (20).
Caution should be exercized whenever lithium is
combined with any drug that may affect renal function.
Frequent monitoring of lithium, creatine and
electrolyte levels and urine osmality may also aid the
rapid recognition of patients developing renal
complications,

324

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antidepressants/lithium
MAOIs (21, 22)

The Committee on Safety of Medicine (CSM) has
warned that enhanced serotoninergic effects may result
when lithium is combined with monoamine oxidase
inhibitors and other antidepressants (see entries below
in this section). Fatal adverse effects have been
reported in a patient receiving fluoxetine,
tranylcypromine and tryptophan along with other
multiple drug therapies (21). A t least 14 days should
elapse between discontinuation of a M A 0 1 and the
introduction of fluoxetine. Because of the long halflives of fluoxetine and its metabolite norfluoxetine, it is
also advised that at least 5 weeks should elapse
between discontinuation of fluoxetine and introduction
of a M A 0 1 antidepressant (22).

SSRIs

The CSM has warned that enhanced serotoninergic
effects may result from combination therapy of highly
selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors such as
fluoxetine and fluvoxamine, with lithium and other
antidepressants (monoamine oxidase inhibitors,
tryptophan). Although such enhancement may be
beneficial in some instances, it can produce a lifethreatening serotonin syndrome comprising
hyperthermis, tremor and convulsions. The CSM has
received 19 reports of adverse reactions where patients
were concomitantly treated with fluvoxamine and
lithium; five of these reports concerned convulsions
and one report was associated with hyperpyrexia (23).
Such combination therapy should be used with extreme
caution.

Tricyclics (3, 4, 24)

Eight patients suffering from a major unipolar
depression and having failed to respond to treatment
for 3 weeks or more with tricyclic antidepressants were
given lithium. All eight patients experienced a
remarkable relief of their depression within 48 hr (3,
4). This rapid antidepressant effect of lithium in
‘treatment-resistant’ patients might be due to the
enhancement of the central serotoninergic system
unveiling the tricyclic antidepressant-induced
sensitization of the serotoninergic postsynaptic
receptors. Serious neurotoxic effects are a risk and

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH LITHIUM SALTS

Combination

325

Interaction

the combination should be used with extreme care. For
example, epileptic seizures have been reported in one
patient receiving amitriptyline when lithium was added
(24).
Tryptophan (23, 25)

The CSM has warned that enhanced serotoninergic
effects may result when lithium is combined with
tryptophan and other antidepressants (see earlier
entries in this section) (23). It should be recalled that
L-tryptophan has been implicated in an acute
eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome which resulted in its
withdrawal from the US and UK markets in 1989. It
has since been re-introduced in the UK under carefully
monitored conditions for use in the treatment of
depressed patients unresponsive to other therapy (see
review (25).

Antiepileptic
agents/lithium
carbamazepine (26-30)

Lithium is known to have an epileptogenic effect even
when used in normal therapeutic doses (26, 27). It is
not surprising therefore that neurotoxicity may occur
with carbamazepine without increased plasma lithium
concentrations. Patients experienced ataxia, dizziness,
blackout, agitation and restlessness, confusion and
feelings of unreality when carbamazepine was
introduced into an established lithium regimen.
Symptoms disappeared when carbamazepine was
withdrawn (28, 29). For example, a 22-year-old woman
with bipolar affective disorder developed severe
neurotoxic symptoms when treated with a combined
regimen of lithium carbonate and carbamazepine in
therapeutic doses. An open trial of the two
medications separately and concurrently implicated a
synergistic interaction between the two (30).

Phenobarbitone
phenytoin (31, 32)

Severe CNS toxicity despite ‘normal’ serum lithium
concentrations has been described in two patients
taking phenytoin alone or together with
phenobarbitone (31, 32).

Antihypertensives/lithium Lithium toxicity has been described in two patients
ACE inhibitor (33, 34)
after therapy with enalapril. In the first case it was

326

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antihypertensives/lithium thought that lithium retention was due to the increase
ACE inhibitor cont.
in sodium excretion induced by enalapril. The second
case was thought to be due to dehydration and volume
deficit, caused by a gastrointestinal upset, being
aggravated by enalapril on the renin-angiotensinaldosterone axis in which the homeostatic response to
extracellular volume loss had become impaired (33,
34).
Ca2+ channel blockers
(35-38)

Neurotoxicity has been reported in one patient
receiving lithium following the addition of verapamil
(35). Serum lithium concentrations were inside the
accepted therapeutic range and it was thought that the
similar actions of lithium and verapamil on
neurosecretory processes were responsible for the
interaction. Verapamil has also been reported to
decrease serum lithium concentrations (36).
Neurotoxicity has also been reported in a patient
receiving lithium and diltiazem as well as other drugs
(37), but the evidence was weak and other
explanations could account for the interaction (38).

Methyldopa (19, 39, 41)

Lithium toxicity induced by concurrent administration
of methyldopa has been described on a number of
occasions.

Antineoplastic agents
(cisplatin)/lithium (42,
43)

Cisplatin has been reported to alter the proximal
tubular reabsorption of calcium and magnesium.
Lithium, being also reabsorbed in the proximal tubules
is a likely candidate for drug interaction. The
hypothesis was tested in a 36-year-old woman who was
maintained on lithium carbonate (300 mg qid) and
required cisplatin (100 mg/m2, followed by i.v.
mannitol and fluids) for cancer of the tongue. The
lithium dose was kept constant. Her serum lithium fell
from 1.0 to 0.3 mEq/l during the first course and from
0.8 to 0.5 mEq/l during the second. These decreases
were transient being reversed in 2 days. The relative
contribution of the cisplatin and the forced diuresis to
the presumed increase in lithium clearance is unknown
(42) *

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH LITHIUM SALTS

Combination

327

Interaction

There are theoretical reasons and some clinical data to
indicate that serum lithium levels fall when cisplatin is
given. This effect appears to be rapidly reversed but it
may be important when high-dose cisplatin is repeated
frequently. Lithium levels should be carefully
monitored under such circumstances (43).

Antipsychotic
agentdlithium
chlorpromazine (44-46)

Since the antimanic effect of lithium carbonate may be
delayed for 7-10 days after starting treatment,
chlorpromazine has been given concurrently for earlier
control of manic behaviour. Lithium has been reported
to be excreted more rapidly during concomitant
treatment with chlorpromazine (44). Concomitant
administration of lithium carbonate and
chlorpromazine in normal subjects reduced peak
plasma chlorpromazine concentrations to 59.7% of
levels with chlorpromazine alone. Area under the
chlorpromazine concentration-time curve was 2.6%
smaller when lithium was taken as well (45). This
interaction may explain inadequate responses to
therapeutic doses of chlorpromazine. It may also
explain why there may be a sudden onset of
chlorpromazine toxicity when lithium is withdrawn
(46). Use this combination with caution.

Haloperidol and other
phenothiazines (47-64)

There have been isolated reports of neurotoxicity of
brain damage (delerium, seizures, encephalopathy,
increased incidence of extrapyramidal symptoms) in
patients receiving lithium concomitantly with
flupenthixol (47), fluphenazine (48), high doses of
haloperidol (49-51) or thioridazine (52, 53). However,
retrospective studies have failed to detect such adverse
interactions in patients receiving lithium and
neuroleptics concomitantly (54, 55). It has been
suggested (56) that neurotoxicity induced by lithium
and neuroleptics is a rare entity, about 40 cases being
reported in the literature. There is controversy
whether the combination produces any greater risk
than either agent alone and there is controversy over
whether the neurotoxicity is a distinct diagnostic entity

328

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Haloperidol and other
phenothiazines cont.

Interaction

or simply represents atypical cases of either lithium
toxicity or the neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Existing neuroleptic drug regimens, usually haloperidol
or phenothiazines, were continued in patients with
Huntington’s chorea started on lithium therapy. These
drugs seemed to enhance the apparently beneficial
response to lithium (57-60). Lithium and
phenothiazines are individually liable to induce
hyperglycaemia (61-64), although clinical reports have
shown a lack of effect of lithium and neuroleptic drug
concentrations on blood glucose levels (64).

Cholinergic
agent/lithium (65)

Lithium antagonizes the effect of neostigmine and
pyridostigmine. Lithium therapy has also been
reported to unmask previously undiagnozed
myasthenia gravis.

Diuretics/lithium
carbonic anhydrase
inhibitor (11, 66)

Acetazolamide impairs the proximal tubular
reabsorption of lithium ions and increases their renal
excretion. This increased lithium excretion could
impair the antipsychotic effect (ll),although the
diuretic action of acetazolamide is short-lived and the
interaction may therefore be transient (66).

Loop diuretics (66-67)

Frusemide, bumetanide and ethacrynic acid seem less
likely to cause lithium retention than the thiazides,
although caution is warranted especially with patients
on restricted dietary sodium (66, 67). Amiloride and
possibly other potassium-sparing diuretics have no
effect on lithium excretion.

Thiazides (66-67)

Thiazide diuretics produce sodium depletion by
inhibiting distal tubular sodium reabsorption. The
consequent increase in proximal tubular reabsorption
frequently results in an increase in plasma lithium
concentrations (66).
Patients who are stabilized on lithium therapy and
begin taking thiazide diuretics are at significant risk of
developing lithium toxicity. The development of
toxicity depends upon pre-diuretic lithium

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH LITHIUM SALTS

Combination

329

Interaction

concentrations, diuretic dose, and the degree of dietary
sodium restriction (67).
General advice on use of
diuretics in patients on
lithium (66-69)

If diuretic therapy is necessary in patients stabilized on
lithium, the lithium dose should be reduced by 2550% (66-68) and lithium concentrations should be
measured twice weekly until re-stabilization occurs.
Loop diuretics may be preferable. Lithium-diuretic
interactions and the precautions required have been
reviewed (69).

Ispaghula husk/lithium
(70)

There has been one report of a possible interaction
between lithium and ispaghula husk (a bulk-forming
laxative). Ispaghula might have inhibited the intestinal
absorption of lithium resulting in low serum
concentrations. Other bulk-forming laxatives may also
inhibit the intestinal absorption of lithium (70).

NSAIDs/lithium (72-83)

Decreased clearance and increased serum
concentrations of lithium resulting in toxicity on some
occasions have been reported after concomitant
prescription of lithium with diclofenac (71), ibuprofen
(72, 73), indomethacin (74, 75), naproxen (76),
piroxicam (77, 78) and these should be avoided in
patients taking lithium. Secondary sources have also
implicated ketoprofen and phenylbutazone (79).
However, serum lithium concentration is not increased
by sulindac (76, 80, 81). Serum lithium concentrations
were increased in one patient receiving aspirin (82) but
this has not been confirmed by others and an
interaction is considered unlikely (75, 83).
Paracetamol is the preferred agent for mild occasional
aches, pains and fever in patients receiving lithium,
although occasional doses of aspirin are acceptable.
Sulindac appears to be the safest NSAID for long-term
use. If it is necessary to use any of the other NSAIDs
then the maintenance dose of lithium should be
reduced (84).

Skeletal muscle
relaxants/lithium

Prolonged neuromuscular blockade has been reported
following the use of d-tubocurarine (65), pancuronium

330

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Skeletal muscle
relaxantdlithium cont.

bromide (85), and succinylcholine (86) in patients
receiving lithium.

Weight reducing
regimendlithium

Some patients have taken a lithium diet t o avoid
weight gain, but this can lead t o lithium toxicity.
This has been reported to be enhanced by the use
of mazindol, a centrally acting anorectic agent (87).

REFERENCES

1 Hynie S, Sharp GWG. (1971) J Endocrinol50, 231.
2 Ramsay TA et al. (1972) J A M A 219, 1446.
3 Editorial. (1972) Br Med J 2, 726.
4 Schou M et al. (1968) Br Med J 3 , 710.
5 Sedvall G et al. (1968) Life Sci 7, 1257.
6 Wiggers S. (1968) Ugeskrifr Laeger 130, 1523.
7 Rogers MP, Whybrow PC. (1971) Am J Psychiatry 128, 158.
8 Candy J. (1972) Br Med J 3 , 277.
9 D’Arcy PF. (1982) Drug Intel1 Clin Pharm 16, 925.
10 Smith RE, Helms PM. (1982) J Clin Psychiatry 43, 94.
11 Thomsen K, Schou M. (1968) Am J Physiol215, 823.
12 Cook BL et al. (1985) J Clin Psychiatry 46,278.
13 McSwiggan CA. (1978) Aust J Pharm 59, 6.
14 Schiessler DM et al. (1983) Am J Hosp Pharm 40, 82.
15 Goode DL et al. (1984) Clin Pharm 3 , 284.
16 Teicher MH et al. (1987) J A M A 257, 3365.
17 Ayd FJ Jr. (1978) Int Drug Ther Newslett 13, 15.
18 McGennis AJ. (1978) Br Med J 1, 1183.
19 O’Regan JB. (1976) Can Med Assoc J 115, 385.
20 Fankhauser MP et al. (1988) Clin Pharm 7, 314.
21 Kline SS et al. (1989) Clin Pharrn 8 , 510.
22 Reynolds JEF. (ed) (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, London, Pharmaceutical Press, p. 254.
23 Committee on Safety of Medicines. (1989) Curr Problems 26 (and correction No. 27),
London, CSM.
24 Solomon JG. (1979) Postgrad Med 66, 145.
25 D’Arcy PF. ((1995) Adverse Drug React Toxic01Rev 14, 37.
26 Demers R et al. (1970) Lancet ii, 315.
27 Massey EW, Folger WN. (1984) South Med J 77, 1173.
28 Ghose K. (1980) Br Med J 280, 1122.
29 Andrus PF. (1984) J Clin Psychiatry 45, 525.
30 Chaudry RP, Waters BGH. (1983) J Clin Psychiatry 44, 30.
31 Speirs J, Hirsch SR. (1978) Br Med J 1, 815.
32 MacCallum WAG. (1980) Br Med J 280, 610.
33 Douste-Blazy P et al. (1986) Lancet i , 1448.
34 Navis GJ et al. (1989) Am J Med 86, 621.
35 Price WA, Giannini AJ. (1986) J Clin Pharrnacol 26, 717.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH LITHIUM SALTS

331

36 Weinrauch LA et al. (1984) Am Heart J 108, 1378.
37 Valdisserri EV. (1985) J Clin Psychiatry 46, 540.
38 Anon. (1987) Drug Interact News 7 , 17.
39 Byrd GJ. (1975) J A M A 233, 320.
40 Reynolds JEF. (ed) (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, London, The Pharmaceutical Press, p. 260.
41 Osanloo E, Eglin JH. (1980) Ann Intern Med 92, 434.
42 Pietruska LJ et al. (1985) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 19, 31.
43 Bitram JD et al. (1982) Cancer 49, 1784.
44 Sletten I et al. (1968) Curr Ther Res 8, 441.
45 Rivera-Calimlim L et al. (1978) Clin Pharmacol Ther 23, 451.
46 Stevenson RN et al. (1989) Postgrad Med J 65, 936.
47 West A. (1977) Br Med J 2, 642.
48 Singh SV. (1982) Lancet ii, 278.
49 Cohen WJ, Cohen NH. (1974) J A M A 230, 1283.
50 London JB, Waring H. (1976) Lancet ii, 1088.
51 Thomas C et al. (1982) Lancet i, 626.
52 Standish-Barry HMAS, Shelly MA. (1983) Lancet i, 771.
53 Cantor CH. (1986) Med J Aust 144, 164.
54 Baastrup PC et al. (1976) J A M A 236, 2645.
55 Prakash R. (1982) Lancet i, 1468.
56 Ross DR, Coffey CE. (1987) In: Johnson FN (ed) Depression & mania: modern lithium
therapy, Oxford, IRL Press, p. 167.
57 Dalen P. (1972) Lancet i, 107.
58 Mattsson B. (1973) Lancet i, 718.
59 Manyam NVB, Bravo-Fernandez E. (1973) Lancet i, 1010.
60 Schenk G, Leijnse-Ybema HJ. (1974) Lancet i, 1010.
61 Zall H et al. (1968) Am J Psychiatry 125, 549.
62 Johnston BB. (1977) Lancet ii, 935.
63 Craij J et al. (1977) Lancet ii, 1028.
64 King DJ. (1978) Br J Clin Pharmacol6, 436.
65 Schou J. (1988) In: D’Arcy PF and Griffin JP (eds) Iatrogenic Diseases, 3rd Edn., Oxford
University Press, p. 546.
66 Beeley L. (1986) Prescribersí J 26, 160.
67 Lott RS. (1983) Drug Interaction News 3 , 17.
68 Ramsay LE. (1984) Prescribersí J 24, 60.
69 Grau E. (1987) In: Johnson FN (ed) Depression & mania: modern lithium therapy,
Oxford, IRL Press, p. 180.
70 Perlman BB. (1990) Lancet 335, 416.
71 Reimann IW, Frolich JC. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 30, 348.
72 Kristoff CA et al. (1986) Clin Pharm 5 , 51.
73 Ragheb M. (1987) J Clin Psychiatry 48, 161.
74 Frolich JC et al. (1979) Br Med J 1, 1115.
75 Reimann IW et al. (1983) Arch Gen Psychiatry 40, 283.
76 Ragheb M, Powell AL. (1986) J Clin Psychopharmacol6, 150.
77 Kerry RJ et al. (1983) Lancet i , 418.
78 Walbridge DG, Bazire SR. (1985) Br J Psychiatry 147, 206.
79 Furnell MM. (1987) In: Johnson FN (ed) Depression & mania: modern lithium therapy,
Oxford, IRL Press, p. 183.
80 Furnell MM, Davies J. (1985) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 19, 374.
81 Ragheb M, Powell AL. (1986) J Clin Psychiatry 47, 33.
82 Bendz H, Feinberg M. (1984) Arch Gen Psychiatry 41, 310.
83 Reimann I. (1984) Arch Gen Psychiatry 41, 311.

332

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

84 Reynolds JEF. (ed) (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, London, The Pharmaceutical Press, p. 261.
85 Borden H et al. (1974) Can Anaesth Soc J 21, 79.
86 Hill GE et al. (1976) Anesthesiology 44, 439.
87 Hendy MS et al. (1980) Br Med J 280, 684.

4.4 DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS
USED IN THE TREATMENT OF
EPILEPSY
The choice of anti-epileptic agent to use is largely dictated by the nature of the
seizures and the age of the patient. The following recommendations reflect current
concensus.
Tonic clonic seizures (Grand ma1 epilepsy): the drugs of choice are carbamazepine,
phenytoin and sodium valproate. Phenobarbitone and primidone are also effective
but sedating.
Absence seizures (petit mal): the drugs of choice are ethosuximide or sodium valproate.
Myoclonic seizures: sodium valproate is the drug of choice, clonazepam and ethosuximide or other antiepileptic agents may be tried.
Absence seizures, atonic and tonic seizures: epilepsy of this type is usually a problem
of childhood, and may be seen in isolation as specific epileptic syndromes or as part
of a more generalized problem of cerebral damage and mental retardation.
Phenytoin, sodium valproate, clonazepam, ethosuximide or any other of the
antiepileptic agents specified below may be tried.
Acetazolamide or corticosteroids may be useful adjuncts.

As a general principle single therapy treatment should always be tried first, in all
patients with epilepsy, the use of therapeutic cocktails are a secondary step after
attempts to control the condition with single agents has not given adequate effect.
Epilepsy in children: Appleton writing in The Prescribersí Journal (1995) states
“Broadly speaking, sodium valproate is currently the first choice for generalized
seizures and epilepsy syndromes, and carbamazepine for partial seizures and syndromes. Phenobarbitone and phenytoin should never be the drugs of first choice in
view of their adverse cognitive and cosmetic effects”. These views are in accord
with those of Verity et al. (1).
Use of anti-epileptic agents in old age: the incidence and prevalence of epilepsy
increase with old age. Stolarek et al. (2) reported a survey of 411 consultant
geriatricians which represented 53% of those contacted to complete a questionnaire
exploring current British approach to treating epilepsy in old age. Only 58% of
those responding said they would initiate anti-epileptic treatment themselves, only
16% would initiate treatment after the first seizure, 59% after the second and 5 %

333

334

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

after the third, Phenytoin was the first choice for generalized tonic-clonic seizures
with carbamazepine the second. If good control was not obtained 67% would
substitute with another first line anticonvulsant, while 27% would add a second
drug. Less than 3% would use the newer anticonvulsants lamotrigine or vigabatrin.
1. HYDANTOINS
Ethotoin
Methoin
Phenytoin sodium
2. OXAZOLIDINES
Paramethadione
Troxidone

3. SUCCINIMIDES
Ethosuximide
Methsuximide
Phensuximide
4. PHENACETYLUREA DERIVATIVES
Phenacemide
Pheneturide

5. LONG-ACTING BARBITURATES AND RELATED COMPOUNDS
Methylphenobarbitone
Phenobarbitone
Primidone
6. BENZODIAZEPINES
Clonazepam
Diazepam
Lorazepam
Nitrazepam

7. OTHER ESTABLISHED AGENTS
Beclamide
Carbamazepine
Chlormethiazole

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

335

Sodium valproate
Sulthiame
8. NEWER AGENTS

Lamotrigine
Lamotrigine was developed as a folate antagonist following suggestions that folate
antagonism, a property of phenytoin and other hydantoins, might be the mode of
their anticonvulsant action. This hypothesis has been discredited and lamotrighe
has turned out to be a useful anti-epileptic agent, not by folate antagonism but by
acting on fast sodium channels in the presynaptic nerve terminals, resulting in
inhibition of the release of glutamate, the major excitatory transmitter. Lamotrigine
has a broad spectrum of anti-epileptic effect. Its use is as an adjunctive treatment
of partial seizures and secondary generalized tonic clonic seizures not adequately
controlled with other anti-epileptics.
Lamotrigine is conjugated to a glucuronide in the liver, it has a 24-hr elimination
half-life in healthy volunteers. Lamotrigine is about 50% bound to plasma proteins.
Allergic skin reactions occur in a small percentage of patients. Rare instances of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome have been reported.
Vigabatrin
Vigabatrin was designed as an inhibitor of the enzyme GABA-transaminase; this
action causes an increase in the concentration of the inhibitory transmitter GABA.
It is indicated for the use as an add-on treatment for epilepsy not satisfactorily
controlled by other anti-epileptic agents, particularly in the therapy of partial and
secondary generalized tonic-chic seizures. It can worsen myoclonic and absence
seizures.
Vigabatrin was originally called gamma-vinyl GABA and had a delayed development due to the observation that it produced vacuolation in the brains of animals
in the toxicological evaluation studies. This has now been demonstrated to be
intramyelinic oedema and is not thought to be relevant for man.
Vigabatrin is not metabolized and has an elimination half-life of 7-8 hr. It is
not protein bound and does not induce hepatic cytochrome P450 or other drugmetabolizing enzymes. Interactions with other drugs are therefore unlikely. In
clinical studies a gradual reduction of about 20% in plasma phenytoin concentration
has been observed. The mechanism is unknown, but is not thought to be of clinical
significance.
Gabapentin
Gabapentin is a structural analogue of GABA and was developed as a GABA
antagonist. Gabapentin is not a GABA antagonist but is an effective antiepileptic
agent by a mechanism as yet not fully elucidated. It binds firmly to a peptide binding

336

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

site in the brain. Its use is as an adjunct to the treatment of partial seizures
with or without secondary generalization, not satisfactorily controlled with other
epileptics.
Gabapentin is excreted unchanged in the urine. It has an elimination half-life of
5-7 hr.
Plasma protein binding is negligible.

It is important to note that none of these three newer antiepileptic agents are as yet
currently recommended for single therapy treatment.
Single therapy studies on all three of these agents are underway. Vigabatrin has
been shown to be particularly effective in infantile spasms, particularly those associated with tuberous sclerosis where it may become accepted as the drug of choice.
Tiagabine
Tiagabine has a novel mechanism of action: inhibition of GABA re-uptake. In
placebo-controlled trials tiagabine was associated with a 50% or greater reduction
in seizure rate in 24% of patients with complex partial seizures, in 32% of patients
with simple partial seizures and in 45% of patients with secondary generalization.
Tiagabine has been filed for marketing approval in USA and Denmark.
Felbamate
Felbamate (2 phenyl-1-3 propanediol dicarbomate) is a unique antiepileptic agent.
MAJOR SOURCES OF INTERACTIONS AMONGST
ANTI-EPILEPTIC AGENTS
Phenytoin and Phenobarbitone
The vast majority of drug interactions with anticonvulsant drugs occur with phenytoin and with phenobarbitone. Phenytoin is metabolized by hepatic microsomal
enzymes to an inactive parahydroxylated derivative which is excreted in the bile
and urine as the glucuronide. This metabolic route accounts for 60-70'70 of the
administered dose; 5% is excreted unchanged in the urine and approximately 30%
is excreted as other metabolites. The metabolites of phenytoin excreted in the bile
are resorbed from the intestine and elimination of the drug is delayed.
The enzymes which metabolize phenytoin can be saturated, and many of the
drugs interacting with phenytoin do so by saturating this mechanism, therefore
these reactions are most critical in patients who require high doses of phenytoin to
control their epilepsy. The effects of phenytoin are enhanced by those drugs which
diminish its metabolism in the liver or impair liver function; the effects are diminished by drugs which induce enzymic activity in the liver.
Phenytoin sodium diffuses across the placenta and caution should be exercized
in its use during pregnancy; it is found in the milk of nursing mothers. Phenytoin

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

337

should be administered with caution to patients receiving thyroid replacement therapy, since phenytoin is known to displace thyroxine from plasma protein binding,
thus elevating the free thyroxine level. Some patients taking phenytoin have demonstrated a megaloblastic anaemia associated with a low serum folate level; phenytoin
has been shown in both in vitro and in vivo studies to inhibit the intestinal conjugase
necessary for the conversion of dietary folic polyglutamates into readily absorbable
free folic acid.
Toxic effects of treatment with phenytoin sodium are of fairly frequent occurrence
and are occasionally severe. The milder effects can usually be overcome by reduction
of dosage for a few days and then gradual restoration up to the original dosage;
these effects include dizziness, nausea and skin rashes. Tenderness and hyperplasia
of the gums are frequent occurrences, especially in younger patients. Hirsutism is
a less frequent effect, but is most noticeable in young females. Other adverse
reactions include tremors, fever, vomiting, blurring of vision, ataxia, mental confusion and hallucinations. Leucopenia, pancytopenia, exfoliative dermatitis and
purpura: these effects are always severe and may necessitate immediate withdrawal
of the drug. Lupus erythematosus and widespread lymphadenopathy accompanied
by fever, hepatomegaly and splenomegaly have been very occasionally reported.
Phenytoin sodium is strongly alkaline (pH about 11-12) in solution and may
cause gastric irritation; this can be prevented to some extent by taking the dose
with at least half a glassful of water after meals. However, the therapeutic effect is
greatest if dosage is taken before meals.
Phenobarbitone is mainly excreted unchanged in the urine; it is only about 40%
bound to plasma proteins and about 10% of a dose is metabolized to an inactive
hydroxyl derivative and excreted in the urine with the unchanged drug. It is a weak
acid and thus is excreted more rapidly at high urinary pH and more slowly at low
pH. It has two main roles in drug interactions; first, it induces liver microsomal
enzymes and thus will reduce the activity of a range of other drugs including
phenytoin by enhancing their metabolism. The concomitant administration of phenytoin with phenobarbitone in epilepsy reduces the level of phenytoin in the plasma
to below that attained when phenytoin is given alone. Fortunately this alteration
in phenytoin metabolism does not seem to be a problem in the management of the
epileptic patient since phenobarbitone also possesses anticonvulsant activity. Its
second role in drug interactions is that its CNS-depressant action augments the
effect of any other CNS-depressant drug.
Other anticonvulsant drugs do not figure in reported cases of drug interaction to
any significant extent; carbamazepine has close structural similarity to the tricyclic
antidepressants, and it has been suggested that it may therefore be dangerous
in patients receiving MA01 antidepressants although no clinical reports of such
interaction have appeared. Sulthiame appears to inhibit the metabolism of diphenylhydantoin by the liver, which prolongs its half-life and increases its plasma level.
This interaction has been demonstrated in the clinic and could be of importance if
the drugs are used in combination in epilepsy. The benzodiazepines would appear
to have little effect on liver microsomal enzymes and do not enter into those

338

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

interactions common to drugs with enzyme-inducing properties. Biological studies
of sodium valproate indicate that it produces an increase in the level of aminobutyric
acid (GABA) in the brain by inhibiting GABA transaminase, the enzyme responsible for the breakdown of GABA. However, there is no simple correlation between
convulsive activity and GABA levels, although evidence linking them is growing.
Sodium valproate may enhance the sedative effects of other drugs and potentiate
MAOIs and thymoleptics. False positives may occur in urine testing for diabetics.
The compound has been shown to be teratogenic in animals and should be avoided
in women of child-bearing age unless possible benefits outweigh this hazard.

I. DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH PHENYTOIN
1. Drugs which Enhance the Effects of Phenytoin
These drugs set out on the table below have been reported, sometimes in single or
isolated cases (*), to potentiate the effects of phenytoin and so increase the risks
of intoxication. They interact with phenytoin by a number of mechanisms including
liver enzyme inhibition and displacement from plasma-protein binding. Details of
some of the interactions in this category are given below. See also review articles
on drug interactions with phenytoin (50, 51).
Aspirin (3, 4)
Azapropazone (5, 6)
Chloramphenicol (7, 10)
Chlordiazepoxide (11)
"Chlorpheniramine (12)
Cimetidine (14-16)
Co-trimoxazole (17)
Dexamethasone (20, 21)
*Dextropropoxyphene (propoxyphene) (22,23)
Diazepam (11)
Dicoumarol (24)
Disulfiram (25-28)
"Frusemide (furosemide) (29)
*Halothane (30)
Isoniazid (in slow inactivators) (31-34)
Lithium (35)

Cornbination

Aspirin/phenytoin (4)

*Methylphenidate (36)
*Oestrogens (13)
Oral contraceptives (37)
Pheneturide (11)
Phenylbutazone (38, 39)
Phenyramidol (40, 41)
*Prochlorperazine (13)
"Propranolol (29)
Sulphadiazine (17)
Sulphamethizole (17)
Sulphaphenazole (17)
Sulthiame (42-44)
"Thioridazine (45)
Thyroid hormones (46)
Tolbutamide (47)
Viloxazine (48)
*Warfarin (48)
Interaction

Aspirin, in healthy subjects, caused 27% increase in
free phenytoin fraction in plasma at 4 hr and reduced

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

Combination

339

Interaction

48-hr area under curve (AUC) for total phenytoin by
19% : free phenytoin AUC values were unchanged.
More rapid clearance of total phenytoin probably
compensated for salicylate displacement of phenytoin
from plasma binding.
Total phenytoin concentrations for therapeutic
monitoring must be interpreted cautiously when
patients also receive salicylates. Interaction does not
necessitate modification of phenytoin dosage (4).
Azapropazone/phenytoin A change from fenclofenac to azapropazone (600 mg
bid) to control a flare-up of arthritis evoked
( 5 , 6)
neurological toxicity and hospitalization in an epileptic
patient stabilized on phenytoin and primidone ( 5 ) .
Competition by the two drugs for hepatic
hydroxylation systems is the likely mechanism of this
interaction.
A grand ma1 epileptic, who had received maintenance
treatment with phenytoin 300 mg tid for 3 years,
developed increasing confusion, nausea, diplopia,
nystagmus and vertigo 2 weeks after starting
azapropazone 600 mg twice daily. His condition
returned to normal when both drugs were stopped,
and later phenytoin was restarted without recurrence
of toxicity (6). A follow-up study in five normal
subjects showed that azapropazone (600 mg bid)
caused plasma phenytoin concentrations to double and
two subjects showed severe drowsiness (6).

Antibiotics and Antibacterials/phenytoin
Chloramphenicol/
Nine out of 20 patients receiving chloramphenicol and
phenytoin (7-10)
phenytoin simultaneously experienced CNS toxicity of
phenytoin; tetracyclines plus phenytoin in 19 patients
gave no toxic symptoms.
Chloramphenicol is known to block metabolism of
phenytoin by liver enzymes (9). Chloramphenicol given
to a patient stabilized on phenytoin and
phenobarbitone caused the serum concentration of
phenytoin to increase from 10.8 to 30.5 kg/ml. Dosage

340

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Chloramphenicol/
phenytoin cont.

of the two anticonvulsants had to be reduced by 25%
to reduce adverse effects (10).

Erythromycidphenytoin
(52)

There is limited evidence of an interaction with
erythromycin (52), but this was subject to considerable
interindividual variation and is of unknown clinical
significance.

Isoniazid/phenytoin
(53-55)

The interaction with isoniazid is well documented and
potentially significant in slow acetylators of isoniazid.
Some 10-20% of subjects receiving this combination
may develop raised phenytoin concentrations and signs
of toxicity (53, 54). At least one case was fatal (55).
The effect is due to inhibition of hepatic microsomal
enzymes by isoniazid; poor metabolizers of isoniazid
may develop sufficient blood isoniazid concentrations
for this inhibition to become marked.

Metronidazole/phenytoin Conflicting results have been reported with
(56-59)
metronidazole (56, 57), while a fall in serum phenytoin
concentrations and a loss of seizure control has been
reported in a patient in whom nitrofuratoin was added
to therapy (58). A combination of impaired absorption
and impaired metabolism of phenytoin was suggested
as the cause of this interaction. A similar mechanism
has been proposed for an interaction between oxacillin
and phenytoin which resulted in one patient
developing status epilepticus (59).
Rifampicin/phenytoin
(60-62)

Rifampicin can reduce plasma phenytoin
concentrations and markedly increase its clearance (60,
61). When given together with isoniazid and phenytoin
it will override the effect of isoniazid on phenytoin
even in slow acetylators (61). Various sulphonamides
are reported to interact with phenytoin reducing its
clearance and prolonging its half-life (62).

Cimetidine/phenytoin
(14-16, 100)

In four studies cimetidine (900-1000 mg daily)
produced a 13, 28, 60 or 100% increase in serum
phenytoin concentrations in epileptic patients. Four of
14 patients exhibited rash or CNS signs of phenytoin

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

Combination

341

Interaction

intoxication. Cimetidine inhibited the hepatic
hydroxylation of phenytoin.
Dexamethasone/phenytoin Although it is established that dexamethasone blood
(20-21)
concentrations are decreased by concomitantly
administered phenytoin (20), it is not well known that
this steroid can evoke an increase in phenytoin
concentration of about 40% (21). This interaction is
probably due to both drugs competing for
hydroxylation via liver microsomal enzymes.
Fluconazole/phenytoin
(63)

The broad spectrum antifungal agent, fluconazole, has
been implicated in six cases of increased phenytoin
serum concentrations and systemic toxicity when the
two agents are used together (63). Fluconazole, as with
the related ketoconazole, inhibits hepatic oxidative
drug metabolizing activities and thus potentiates the
action and toxicity of co-administered phenytoin. The
onset of toxicity usually occurs within 2-7 days after
the start of fluconazole.

Disulfiram/phenytoin
(26-28)

It is known that the use of disulfiram in epileptic
patients controlled on phenytoin causes a marked rise
in serum phenytoin concentrations and may evoke
phenytoin overdosage (26, 27). The kinetics of this
interaction have been analysed (28) and they indicate
that disulfiram affects the elimination rate of phenytoin
by non-competitive mechanisms.

Oral
Steady-state plasma phenytoin concentrations in 40
contraceptives/phenytoin oral contraceptive users were higher relative to
phenytoin dose than in 135 age-matched non-users of
(37)
oral contraceptives.
This combination is not recommended since the oral
contraceptive agents may induce phenytoin toxicity.
Also the efficacy of the oral contraceptive is impaired
in epileptic patients taking phenytoin due to P450
induction.
Thioridazinelphenytoin

(45)

Clinically significant phenytoin intoxication occurred in
two cases during concomitant administration of
thioridazine. Both drugs are metabolized in the liver

342

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

Interaction

Thioridazine/phenytoin
cont.

and each competes with the other for cytochrome P450
hydroxylation; thus the enzyme system becomes
saturated and phenytoin metabolism is inhibited.

2. Drugs which Decrease the Effects of Phenytoin
Alcohol (64)
Antacids (65)
"Cancer chemotherapy (66)
bleomycin
cisplat in
vinblastine
Carbamazepine (67-68)
"Dichloralphenazone (69)
Phenobarbitone (70)
Sodium valproate (71-73)
These drugs have been reported, sometimes in single or isolated cases (*) to
decrease the effects of phenytoin and adversely affect the control of epilepsy.
They interact with phenytoin by a number of mechanisms including liver enzyme
induction, decreased absorption of phenytoin from the gut, or even (with cancer
chemotherapy) due to intestinal mucosal damage and subsequent reduced absorption. Details of some of the interactions in this category are given below. See also
review articles on drug interactions with phenytoin (50, 51).
Combination

Interaction

AlcohoVphenytoin
(64, 74)

Alcohol induces liver microsomal enzymes and thus
increases the metabolism of phenytoin.

Antacidsjphenytoin (65)

Studies in normal subjects showed that, although no
specific interaction could be identified, a trend of
decreased absorption of phenytoin in the presence of
the proprietary antacid Asilone was seen, and in some
subjects this decrease was substantial. Concomitant
dosage with Asilone or its constituents (dimethicone,
aluminium hydroxide gel, light magnesium oxide) may
change phenytoin absorption.
Spacing of dosage of phenytoin and antacid by 3-4 hr
should be considered as a precaution.

Carbamazepine/phenytoin Carbamazepine induces liver microsomal enzymes and
(67-68)
thus increases the metabolism of phenytoin.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

Combination

343

Interaction

Carbamazepine is also an anti-epileptic agent, and if
both drugs are used the patient should be monitored to
determine whether adjustment of phenytoin dosage is
required.
Ciprofloxacin/phenytoin
(75)

A 78-year-old patient was stabilized on phenytoin
300 mg daily for a history of seizure disorders.
Subsequently, he developed a lower lobe abscess on
his left lung and was treated with intravenous
ciprofloxacin 400 mg per 12h. The plasma phenytoin
concentration fell dramatically despite increase in the
dose of phenytoin. When ciprofloxacin treatment was
stopped the phenytoin plasma concentrations rose to
pre-ciprofloxacin levels (75). Changes in plasma
concentration of phenytoin when administered
concurrently with ciprofloxacin have been anticipated
by the manufacturer (Miles Inc, package insert) but
this is the first published report of such an interaction.
The mechanism involved was thought to be
ciprofloxacin’s induction of the P450 oxidative enzymes
responsible for phenytoin’s metabolism.

Dichloralphenazone/
phenytoin (69)

Nightly administration of dichloralphenazone
significantly increased the clearance of phenytoin in an
epileptic patient due to induced microsomal enzyme
activity with loss of epileptic control. The interaction
has been confirmed in healthy subjects.

Phenobarbitone/phenytoin Phenobarbitone induces liver microsomal enzymes and
thus increases the metabolism of phenytoin. The level
(70)
of phenytoin in the plasma is then reduced to below
that attained when phenytoin is given alone. This
alteration in phenytoin metabolism does not seem to
be a problem in the management of the epileptic
patient since phenobarbitone also possesses
anticonvulsant activity.
Valproate/phenytoin
(71-73)

Total serum phenytoin concentrations in six epileptic
patients were significantly lowered in the presence of
valproic acid, but protein binding of phenytoin was
reduced to a similar degree so there was no change in
calculated concentration of unbound phenytoin (71).

344

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Valproate/phenytoin
cont.

Distribution and elimination kinetics of phenytoin in
normal subjects confirm these findings (72).
The interaction may, however, complicate plasma level
monitoring of phenytoin in patients (73). Withdrawal
of sodium valproate from a stabilized regimen may
result in rise of serum phenytoin to toxic levels.

VerapamiVphenytoin
(76-78)

A patient who had taken phenytoin (100 mg twice
daily) for presumed epilepsy for 10 years, presented
with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy with
dypsnoea and episodes of syncope. Verapamil was
started (80 mg twice daily per day rising to 160 mg
thrice daily after 17 months). Despite these increases
in verapamil dosage her plasma concentration of
verapamil remained subnormal and her obstructive
cardiomyopathy showed no substantial improvement.
When phenytoin treatment was discontinued the
plasma concentration of verapamil rapidly rose to
expected levels and her condition improved. It was
concluded that phenytoin had markedly induced the
hepatic metabolism of verapamil and thus markedly
reduced the steady-state concentrations of the drug in
this patient (76). Other cases have experienced a
marked reduction in the steady-state concentrations of
verapamil during combined treatment with rifampicin
and phenobarbitone (77-78) which are also potent
hepatic enzyme inducers.

3. Drug Actions Modified by Phenytoin
Corticosteroids (20, 79, 80)
dexamethasone (20, 79, 80)
prednisone (79, 80)
*Disopyramide (81, 82)
Doxycycline (83, 84)
*Lithium (35)
Methadone (85)
Mexiletine (86)
Mianserin (87)
"Oestrogens (88)
Oral contraceptives (89, 90, 91)
Pethidine (meperidine) (92)

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

345

Primidone (93)
Sodium valproate (94)
Theophylline (95-98)
The therapeutic or toxic effects of the above drugs may be modified in the presence
of concomitantly administered phenytoin; there are various mechanisms of action
but induction of liver microsomal enzymes by phenytoin is probably the most
common. Details of some interactions, which may be single or isolated cases (*),
are given below. See review articles on drug interactions with phenytoin (50, 51).
Combination

Interaction

Corticosteroids/phenytoin Phenytoin increases the rate of dexamethasone
dexamethasone (20, 79, metabolism with resultant lack of efficacy of this
corticosteroid. There is some evidence that prednisone
80)
metabolism is less affected by phenytoin-induced
prednisone (79, 80)
enzyme induction.
Corticosteroids may have a role in the control of some
forms of epilepsy. This interaction may therefore have
major significance since the expected efficacy of the
steroid may not be achieved.
Cyclosporin/phenytoin
(99)

Following the clinical observation that patients
receiving phenytoin required increased doses of
cyclosporin to maintain therapeutic concentrations, the
effect of 10 daily doses of phenytoin, sufficient to
maintain therapeutic concentrations on the kinetics of
cyclosporin, were studied in six volunteers. Phenytoin
reduced the mean area under the concentration-time
curve from 10.4 to 5.5 mg/l/hour.

Disopyramide/phenytoin
(81, 82)

Phenytoin markedly increased the metabolism of
disopyramide in one epileptic patient and in two
normal subjects (the effect subsided in 2 weeks after
stopping phenytoin). Plasma levels and AUC of
disopyramide decreased whilst those of its major
metabolite, mono-N-dealkyldisopyramide increased.
This interaction should be anticipated and the dosage
of disopyramide may have to be increased to obtain
the required anti-arrhythmic effect.

346

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Doxycycline and other
tetracyclinedphenytoin
(83, 84)

The metabolism of doxycycline is accelerated by both
phenytoin and carbamazepine (enzyme inducers).
Although this effect has been shown in man with
respect to doxycycline it will occur with other
tetracyclines.

Lithiumlphenytoin (35)

Increase in phenytoin dosage from 300 to 400 mg daily
evoked lithium-type toxicity in one patient; symptoms
disappeared on stopping lithium but reappeared when
lithium was restarted. Change from phenytoin to
carbamazepine prevented symptoms. However, in
another study the introduction of carbamazepine into
an established lithium regimen provoked severe CNS
toxicity.

Methadone/phenytoin
(85)

Methadone-maintained volunteers experienced
moderately severe opiate withdrawal within 3-4 days
of beginning phenytoin in therapeutic doses. The area
under the methadone plasma concentration-time curve
decreased while the ratio of pyrrolidine to metabolite
excretion in urine for this area increased. This suggests
that phenytoin accelerates methadone metabolism.
These findings have clinical importance if phenytoin
has to be added or withdrawn from an epileptic patient
who is also an addict maintained on methadone.

Mexiletine/phenytoin
(86)

Unexpectedly low plasma concentrations of mexiletine
were seen in three patients treated with mexiletine and
phenytoin. A subsequent study in six normal subjects
given a single oral dose of mexiletine (400 mg) before
and after 1 week of phenytoin (300 mg/day) showed
that the mean half-life of elimination of mexiletine
decreased from 17.2 to 8.4 hr; the mean AUC
decreased from 17.67 to 6.21 p,g/ml/hr.
This enhanced clearance of mexiletine is likely to be
due to hepatic mixed-function oxidase enzyme
induction by phenytoin.
This interaction is likely to be of clinical significance

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

Combination

347

Interaction

because of the magnitude of the increase in the
clearance of mexiletine.
Oestrogens/phenytoin
(88)
Oral contraceptives/
phenytoin (89-91)

Concomitant use of oral contraceptives (combinedtype) and anticonvulsants is known to result in
breakthrough bleeding, spotting and, in some cases,
pregnancy. It is not generally recognized that the
effects of HRT are also diminished due to enhanced
breakdown of oestrogen due to phenytoin induced
enzyme induction. The replacement effect of 1.25 mg
daily of Premarin (conjugated oestrogen) was
antagonized by 300 mg phenytoin daily. Hot flushes
dramatically increased, levels of gonadotropin
increased, and serum levels of oestrogen were
depressed.

Pethidine/phenytoin
(92)

Phenytoin increased the rate of metabolism of
pethidine in normal subjects; the 24-hr AUC of the
weakly active metabolite, norpethidine, increased by
53% during phenytoin administration after i.v.
pethidine, and by 24.7% after oral pethidine.
Pethidine’s volume of distribution, renal clearance and
protein-binding did not change but renal clearance of
norpethidine was four times that of pethidine and was
not altered by phenytoin.
Analgesia is related to pethidine concentration,
therefore higher or more frequent doses of pethidine
may be required when patients are also on long-term
phenytoin.

Primidone/phenytoin
(93)

Primidone exerts its anticonvulsant action, at least in
part, by its oxidation in vivo to phenobarbitone. The
ratio of derived phenobarbitone to unmetabolized
primidone was significantly higher in epileptic patients
treated with a combination of primidone and
phenytoin than in patients on primidone alone. This
interaction should not present clinical problems since
epileptic patients are stabilized on drug combinations.
However, if primidone dosage is altered or if the drug
is withdrawn then the dosage of phenytoin will have to
be adjusted. It is important with such combined dosage

348

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Primidone/phenytoin
cont.

that patient compliance is assured with both
components.

SSRI antidepressants/
mephenytoin (87)

The 4’-hydroxylation of S-mephenytoin was
competitively inhibited by fluoxetine, sertraline,
paroxetine and citalopram and their major metabolites
S-mephenytoin is a representative substrate for the
CYP2 C19 subfamily of P450.

Sodium valproate
(Epilim)/phenytoin (94)

Valproate (as acid or sodium salt) may cause
drowsiness, stupor or coma when given with other
anticonvulsants (phenytoin, carbamazepine, primidone
or phenobarbitone). Four cases suggest this is the
result of an interaction and not a direct side effect of
valproate.
Clinicians should be alert to the possibility that
alterations in consciousness can occur when valproate
is added to other anticonvulsant regimens.

Theophylline/phenytoin
(95-98)

Pharmacokinetic studies in asthmatic patients and in
normal subjects showed that doses of phenytoin that
gave plasma concentrations in the therapeutic range
decreased the half-life of theophylline (mean, 10.15.2 hr) and increased its clearance approximately twofold. Phenytoin-induced hepatic enzyme induction is
the likely mechanism of this interaction (95).
Special attention should be paid to the dosage of
theophylline in patients with airway obstruction when
drugs with enzyme-inducing activity are introduced or
discontinued. Increase in theophylline dosage by a
factor of 1.5-2 should be anticipated when phenytoin
is added to long-term theophylline therapy.
In a volunteer study, phenytoin (100 mg thrice daily
for 3 weeks) significantly reduced the half-life of
theophylline (5 mg/kg i.v. as aminophylline) and this
was associated with an increase in the rate of
theophylline clearance (96). Earlier studies have
reported this interaction (97) and it has also been
shown that phenytoin absorption is reduced when the

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

Combination

349

Interaction

two drugs are ingested at the same time (98). The
resultant equation of this interaction is that both drugs
will show reduced serum concentrations at steady state
after multiple doses.
11. INTERACTIONS WITH PHENOBARBITONE
Combination

Alcohol/phenobarbitone

Interaction

Enhanced sedative effect.

(66)
Antibacterials1
phenobarbitone (66)

The metabolism of chloramphenicol, doxycycline,
metronidazole are all accelerated and the antibacterial
effect is reduced.

Antidepressants1
phenobarbitone (66)

Antagonism of anticonvulsive effect of anti-epileptics
due to lowering of convulsive threshold by mianserin
and tricyclics, Metabolism of mianserin and tricyclics
accelerated due to P450 induction by phenobarbitone.

Antifungalsl
phenobarbitone (66)

Phenobarbitone induces P450 and thus increases
griseofulvin metabolism and reduces its efficacy.

Anticoagulants/
phenobarbitone (66)

The anticoagulant effect of both warfarin and
nicoumalone are reduced due to enzyme induction by
phenobarbitone. Bleeding may occur in anticoagulated
patients if phenobarbitone is withdrawn.

Calcium channel
The effect of diltiazam, felodipine, isradipine,
blockers/phenobarbitone verapamil, nicardipine and nifedipine reduced due to
increased metabolic breakdown by phenobarbitone.
(66)
Corticosteroidsl
phenobarbitone (100)

Metabolism of corticosteroids enhanced with loss of
clinical efficacy.

Cyclosporinl
phenobarbitone (100)

A 4-year-old girl, who was receiving phenobarbitone
50 mg bd and who was administered cyclosporin in a
standard fashion sufficient to produce trough levels,
remained below the limit of the assay (>60 ng/ml)
even after increasing the dose. On reduction of the
phenobarbitone dose cyclosporin A levels rose. It

350

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

Cyclosporin/
phenobarbitone cont.

Interaction

appears likely that in man (as has been shown in rats)
phenobarbitone induces the cytochrome P450
metabolism of cyclosporin A.
Phenobarbitone increases the dosage of cyclosporin
required to obtain therapeutic levels of the drug.

Dextropropoxyphenel
phenobarbitone (23)

Serum concentrations of phenobarbitone increased by
a mean 20% in four epileptic patients after 1 week on
dextropropoxyphene (65 mg tid).
The clinical significance of this interaction is uncertain
but patients receiving this combination should be
followed carefully for signs of enhanced barbiturate
activity.

Oestrogend
phenobarbitone (101,
102)

The efficacy of oral contraceptives can be impaired if
phenobarbitone is used as an anticonvulsant. The
efficacy of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) will
also be impaired by phenobarbitone-induced increased
rate of metabolism.

Theophylline/
phenobarbitone (66)

The metabolism of theophylline is accelerated and its
clinical efficacy reduced.

Thyroxine/
phenobarbitone (66)

The metabolic breakdown of endogenous and
exogenous thyroxine is accelerated. Patients whose
hypothyroidism has previously been controlled may
need an increase in thyroxine dosage if phenobarbitone
is administered.

Vitamin D/
phenobarbitone (66,
140)

Increased metabolism of Vitamin D occurs. This is
thought to be one of the mechanisms of hip fracture
associated with phenobarbitone usage (140).

111. DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH CARBAMAZEPINE
An analysis of therapeutic failure with carbamazepine revealed that in seven out of
131 cases (5.3%) failure was due to a drug interaction (103). Interacting drugs
which will lower the carbamazepine blood level have been listed and include:
other anticonvulsant agents (phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone, valproic acid,
progabide) theophylline, isoretinoin, chloramphenicol and cytostatic agents.
Drugs which, if taken concurrently may increase serum carbamazepine levels,

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

351

have been listed as: acetazolamide, allopurinol, cimetidine, danazol, desipramine,
diltiazem, disulfiram, erythromycin, fluoxetine, isoniazid, josamycin, nicotinamide,
phenelzine, propoxyphene, troleandomycin, verapamil and viloxazine.

Combination

Interaction

Antibacterial
agentdcarbamazepine
macrolide antibiotics
(66, 104-106)
e.g.
clarithromycin
erythromycin
troleandomycin

The evidence from reports suggests that these
antibiotics elevate plasma carbamazepine levels by
their inhibitory effect on metabolizing microsomal
enzyme systems.
Combinations of carbamazepine with macrolide
antibiotics should be avoided.

isoniazid (107)

Increases in carbamazepine serum concentrations and
signs of toxicity have been reported in an 18-year-old
female following oral isoniazid (300 mg/day) for 5
days. Carefully monitor patients on this combination;
reduction in carbamazepine dosage should be
anticipated.

tetracyclines (66)

Patients should be monitored for effective antibiotic
activity if doxycycline (or other tetracyclines) is given
in combination with phenytoin, carbamazepine or
other known enzyme inducer. It may be necessary to
avoid this particular combination.

Anticoagulants/
carbamazepine (66)

The metabolism of warfarin and nicoumalone are
accelerated, i.e. reduced anticoagulant effect when
given with carbomazepine.

Antidepressants1
carbamazepine (23, 66)

Antagonism of anticonvulsant effect by tricyclic
antidepressants and manserin. Carbamazepine should
not be administered with or within 2 weeks of
discontinuing of MA01 therapy. Plasma concentrations
of carbamazepine are increased by the SSRIs i.e.
fluoxetine, fluvoxamine and viloxazine.

352

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Calcium antagonists/
carbamazepine
(108-109)
e.g.
verapamil
diltiazem
nifedipine

Interaction

It has been suggested that calcium antagonists, such as
verapamil and diltiazem, might be effective adjuncts to
anticonvulsant therapy by inhibiting the propagation of
seizures (108). A 34-year-old man was treated (109)
with carbamazepine for epilepsy for 1 year. Verapamil
was then added to the regime since he continued to
have seizures 4 timedday. He developed signs of
carbamazepine toxicity (12-13 mg/l).
After 3 months the patient was tried on nifedipine as
the calcium antagonist. No signs of carbamazepine
toxicity occurred.
Diltiazem and verapamil inhibit hepatic monooxygenase activity in mice by binding to cytochrome
P450. Nifedipine belongs to a group of calcium
antagonists (dihydropyrridines) which is structurally
different from diltiazem and verapamil. The authors
(99) believe that calcium antagonist therapy with
nifedipine and carbamazepine is satisfactory but not
with other agents.

Plastic nasogastric
tubedcarbamazepine
(113-1 15)

Significant losses of carbamazepine has been reported
after a suspension of the drug was administered via
polyvinyl nasogastric feeding tubes. Losses of up to
23% were recorded. The drug is thought to ‘sorb’ to
the plastics material (113).
This may be alleviated by mixing the suspension with
an equal volume of diluent before administering the
suspension. A similar problem has arisen with the
administration of phenytoin by this route (114).
Another study involving nasogastric feeding has found
reduced activity of administered phenytoin which was
attributed to phenytoin being bound to the enteral
feed components (115).

Terfenadine/
carbamazepine (116)

An 18-year-old woman suffered an interaction between
the antihistaminic terfenadine and carbamazepine
which resulted in her hospitalization. She presented
with symptoms of confusion, disorientation and visual
hallucinations, nausea and ataxia which had developed

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

Combination

353

Interaction

shortly after taking terfenadine 60 mg twice daily by
mouth for the symptomatic relief of rhinitis.
On admission her serum levels of total carbamazepine
were within normal limits but her serum levels of free
carbamazepine were almost three times the upper limit
of normal. Because terfenadine and carbamazepine are
both highly protein bound, it was thought that
terfenadine had displaced the carbamazepine, resulting
in higher than normal free carbamazepine levels.
Treatment with terfenadine was stopped and the
patient’s free carbamazepine serum levels fell to
normal with a corresponding resolution of her toxic
symptoms (116).
Cimetidinel
carbamazepine
(110, 111)

Eleven epileptic patients taking regular carbamazepine
or carbamazepine and phenytoin were treated with
cimetidine 300mg tds for 7 or 10 days (110). No
change in carbamazepine steady-state plasma levels
was observed. A mean rise in phenytoin levels of 28%
was found by 1 week.
Cimetidine (400 mg daily) caused increased plasma
carbamazepine concentrations and neurological toxicity
in an elderly woman who had been successfully treated
with carbamazepine (600 mg daily) for 20 years for
trigeminal neuralgia (111).

Dextropropoxyphene/
carbamazepine
(23, 112)

Dextropropoxyphene added to regular carbamazepine
regimen (alone or with phenobarbitone) produced
severe side effects and 45-77% increase in plasma
concentrations of carbamazepine in seven patients
(112). In another study, the serum concentrations of
carbamazepine increased by a mean of 66% in six
epileptic patients after 5 days on dextropropoxyphene
(65 mg tid). This level was maintained or increased
during a further week’s treatment with
dextropropoxyphene and one patient showed signs of
clinical toxicity (23).

Lithium/carbamazepine
(23)

The combination of lithium and carbamazepine may
cause enhanced lithium toxicity despite lithium plasma
concentrations being within the therapeutic range.

354

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

IV. DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH SODIUM VALPROATE
Combination

Interaction

Valproic acid/antacids
(117)

A limited study in seven normal subjects indicated that
three commonly prescribed antacids (Maalox, Trisogel
and Titralac), particularly aluminium and magnesium
hydroxide suspension (Maalox) , may increase the
bioavailability of oral doses of valproic acid. The
clinical significance of this finding at steady-state levels
of valproic acid, has yet to be established but caution
should be exercized if valproic acid and antacids are
administered concurrently.

Valproic acidlaspirin
(118, 119)

In five of six epileptic children taking 18-49 mg/kg
daily valproic acid (VPA), the steady-state serum-free
fractions of VPA rose from 12 to 43% when
antipyretic doses of aspirin were taken (118). Mean
total VPA half-life rose from 10.4 to 12.9 hr and mean
free VPA half-life rose from 6.7 to 8.9 hr when
salicylate was present in the serum. Salicylate appeared
to displace VPA from serum albumin in vivo, but
increased VPA half-life and changes in VPA
elimination patterns suggested that serum salicylate
also altered VPA metabolism. A related study, also in
children, showed that aspirin (up to 68 mg/kg daily
caused decreased clearance of free fraction and 49%
increased free serum levels of valproate. It was
concluded that co-administration of these drugs for
more than 24 hr might result in toxic levels of valproic
acid due to competition for active transport sites in
renal tubules or liver.
Although no untoward effects were reported in these
studies, the results strongly suggest that prolonged use
of salicylates in combination with valproic acid may
result in greater than anticipated free serum levels of
VPA with cumulation to toxic levels.

Sodium valproate/
diazepam (120, 121)

Serm protein binding of diazepam is competitively
inhibited by valproic acid (from 98.1 to 96.1%) (120).
In another study, oral sodium valproate (1500 mg/day)
displaced diazepam from protein binding sites
(unbound fraction in serum increased two-fold) and

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

Combination

355

Interaction

inhibited its metabolism in a kinetic study in normal
subjects (121).
This interaction may have clinical implications since
diazepam is frequently used in epileptic patients for its
anticonvulsive effect, or in the treatment of co-existing
anxiety or spasticity.
Valproic
acidlphenobarbitone
(122-125)

The mean half-life of phenobarbitone acid in six
normal subjects increased from 96 to 142 hr after
taking valproic acid (250 mg bid) for 14 days. Plasma
clearance of phenobarbitone fell from 4.2 to
3.0 ml/hr/kg; renal clearance did not change; the
metabolic clearance fell from 3.3 to 2.0 mg/hr/kg.
More of the phenobarbitone was excreted unchanged
and the fraction metabolized fell from 0.78 to 0.67.
This suggests that valproic acid inhibits the metabolism
of phenobarbitone (122). It has been shown that
valproate inhibits the direct N-glucosidation of
phenobarbitone and the 0-glucuronation of p-hydroxy
phenobarbitone (122).
Of 13 patients with complex partial seizures who
experienced stuporous states during treatment with
sodium valproate (SVP), four received SVP only, four
received SVP and phenobarbitone (PB), and five
received SVP, PB and a third commonly used anticonvulsant (carbamazepine, clonazepam, diazepam or
phenytoin). Stupor therefore seemed to be related to
an intrinsic effect of SVP which was sometimes potentiated by other anticonvulsants. EEG symptoms observed during SVP-induced episodes resembled those
of spontaneously occurring partial seizures (123-124).
Clinicians should be alert to the possibility that
alterations in consciousness can occur when valproate
is added to other anticonvulsant regimens.
Hyperammonaemia and hepatotoxicity have also been
reported to increase in frequency when valproate is
used in combination with other anti-epileptic drugs
(125).

356

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

V. INTERACTIONS WITH THE NEWER ANTIEPILEPTIC AGENTS
(GABAPENTIN, LAMOTRIGINE, VIGABATRIN)
Little is known of the clinical interactions with the new anti-epileptics, but all
current information (126-133) would indicate that they are freer from adverse
interactions than the older and currently well established agents.

Combination

Interaction

Antaciddgabapentin
(126)

Magnesium and aluminium salts slightly reduce the
absorption of gabapentin.

Cimetidine/gabapentin
(130-131)

Cimetidine has been reported to slow the clearance of
gabapentin.

Anti-epileptic
agentdlamotrigine (126)

Enzyme-inducing anti-epileptic drugs, carbamazepine,
phenobarbitone, phenytoin and primidone, increase
the elimination of lamotrigine shortening its normal 24hr half-life to 15 hr. Efficacy of lamotrigine is reduced.

Sodium valproate/
lamotrigine (132, 133)

Sodium valproate inhibits the metabolism of
lamotrigine lengthening its half-life to as much as
60 hr. In those patients taking sodium valproate the
dose of lamotrigine is 25 mg alternate days for the first
2 weeks, followed by 25 mg once a day for 2 weeks.
Thereafter the usual dose of 100-200 mg/day may be
given.

Phenytoidvigabatrin
(129, 132)

Vigabatrin slightly lowers (20%) phenytoin levels by
an undetermined mechanism.

Felbamate/other
anti-epileptic agents
(136-140)

Felbamate reduces the clearance of agents phenytoin,
phenobarbitone and valproate and increases the
clearance of carbamazepine. Its own metabolic
clearance is increased by phenytoin, carbamazepine

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

Combination

357

Interaction

and phenobarbitone (135-139).
There is no clinically relevant interaction between
vigabatrin and felbamate (139).
VI. DRUGS WHICH INCREASE THE RISK OF EPILEPTIFORM SEIZURES
Oral contraceptives (89, 142)
Reserpine (143)
Rifampicin (144)
Tricyclic antidepressants (65-68)
These drugs have been reported to increase the risk of epileptiform seizures; indeed
tricyclic antidepressants can produce grand ma1 fits in non-epileptic patients. The
interactions within this group are more related to drug-disease interaction than to
the drug-drug variety. Details of some of the interactions in this category are given
below.
Combination

Interaction

Oral contraceptives
(89 , 142)

OralI contraceptives (combined type) may cause fluid
reteintion which may precipitate seizures in epileptics.
Cast:s of oral contraceptive-induced exacerbation of
epilt:psy have been reported. Phenytoin may reduce
the Iefficacy of oral contraceptives due to enzyme
indu.ction.
The use of this combination has to be carefully
asse;ssed with respect to possible failure of
contraception and due, in some cases, to increased
inciclence of fits. Where possible, it would be better to
advise alternative methods of contraception.

Reserpine (143)

Reserpine lowers the convulsive threshold;
anticonvulsant dosage may have to be adjusted to
control epilepsy.
Although severe problems have not been reported,
reserpine should be used with caution in epileptic
patients controlled on anticonvulsants; the necessity for
increasing the dose of anticonvulsant should be
anticipated.

Rifampicin/isoniazid
and ethambutol (144)

Rifampicin increases the clearance of phenytoin by
two-fold. This effect is not ameliorated by the

358

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Rifampicin/isoniazid
and ethambutol cant.

Interaction

addition of other standard anti-TB therapy: isoniazid
and ethambutol.
Rifampicin alone or in combination with other anti-TB
drugs significantly reduces the effect of phenytoin.

Tricyclic antidepressants Tricyclic antidepressants (e.g. amitriptyline,
(145-148)
imipramine) may produce epileptiform seizures in
susceptible patients. High doses can produce grand ma1
fits even in non-epileptic patients (148).
Caution should be observed if tricyclic antidepressants
are given to patients with epilepsy. Patients should be
carefully supervised during such treatment, and the
necessity for increasing the anticonvulsant dosage
should be anticipated.
Recommended further reading
Appleton RE. (1995) Epilepsy. Prescribersí J 35, 182-191.
Laidlaw J, Richens A, Chadwick D (eds). (1993) A Textbook of Epilepsy, 4th Edn, Churchill
Livingstone, Edinburgh.
Levy RH, Dreifuss FE, Mattson RH, Meldrum BS, Penry JD (eds). (1989) Antiepileptic
Drugs, 4th Edn, Raven Press, New York.
Patsalos PN, Duncan JS. (1994) New antiepileptic drugs. A review of their current status and
clinical potential. C N S Drugs 2 , 40-77.
Stolarek IH, Brodie AF, Brodie MJ. (1995) Management of seizures in the elderly: a survey
of UK geriatricians. J R SOCMed 88, 686-689.

REFERENCES

1 Verity CM et al. (1995) Dev Med Child Neurol37, 97.
2 Stolarek IH et al. (1995) J R SOCMed 88, 686.
3 Fraser D G et al. (1980) Clin Pharrnacol Ther 27, 165.
4 Paxton JW. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 27, 170.
5 Roberts CJC et al. (1981) Postgrad Med J 57, 191.
6 Geaney DP et al. (1982) Br Med J 284, 1373.
7 Christensen LK, Skovsted L. (1969) Lancet ii, 1397.
8 Ballek R E et al. (1973) Lancet i, 150.
9 Harper JM et al. (1979) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 13, 425.
10 Koup JR et al. (1978) Clin Pharmacol Ther 24, 571.
11 Houghton GW, Richens A. (1974) Br J Clin Pharmacol 1 , 344P.
12 Pugh RNH et al. (1975) B r J Clin Pharmacol 2 , 173.
13 Kutt H , McDowell F. (1968) J A M A 203, 969.
14 Aigozzine GJ et al. (1981) Ann Intern Med 95, 244.
15 Hetzel DJ et al. (1981) B r Med J 282, 1512.
16 Neuvonen PJ et al. (1981) Br Med J 283, 501.
17 Hansen JM et al. (1975) B r Med J 2 , 684.
18 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin. (1972) 10,25.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

359

19 Williams JRB et al. (1975) QJ Med 44, 675.
20 McLelland J, Jack W. (1978) Lancet i, 1096.
21 Lawson LA et al. (1981) Surg Neurol 16, 23.
22 Kutt H. (1971) A n n N Y Acad Sci 179, 704.
23 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, p. 57983.
24 Hansen JM et al. (1966) Lancet ii, 265.
25 Dry J, Pradalier A. (1973) Therapie 28, 799.
26 Kiorboe E. (1966) Epilepsia 7 , 246.
27 Olesen OV. (1966) Acta Pharmacol Toxic0124, 317.
28 Taylor JW et al. (1981) Am J Hosp Pharm 38, 93.
29 Eadie MJ, Tyrer JH. (1974) Anticonvulsant Therapy, Churchill Livingstone, London, p.
64.
30 Karlin JM, Kutt H. (1970) J Pediatr 76, 941.
31 Murray FJ. (1962) Am Rev Resp Dis 86, 729.
32 Brennan RW et al. (1970) Neurology 20, 687.
33 Kutt H et al. (1970) Am Rev Resp Dis 101, 377.
34 Johnson J. (1975) Br Med J 1, 152.
35 MacCallum WAG. (1980) Br Med J 280, 610.
36 Garrettson LK. (1969) J A M A 207, 2053.
37 DeLeacy E A et al. (1979) Br J Clin Pharmacol8, 33.
38 Kristensen MB. (1976) Clin Pharmacokinet 1, 351.
39 Neuvonen PJ et al. (1979) Eur J Clin Pharrnacoll5, 263.
40 Solomon HM, Schrogie JJ. (1967) Clin Pharmacol Ther 8 , 554.
41 Reynolds JEF. (ed) (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th edn, Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 305.
42 Richens A , Houghton GW. (1973) Lancet ii, 1442.
43 Richens A , Houghton GW. (1973) Br Med J 2, 544.
44 Richens A, Houghton GW. (1974) Br J Clin Pharmacol 1, 59.
45 Vincent FM. (1980) Ann Intern Med 93, 56.
46 Fulop M et al. (1966) J A M A 196, 454.
47 Wesseling H , Mols-Thurkow I. (1975) Eur J Clin Pharmacol8, 75.
48 Martindale. (1982) The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 28th edn, Pharmaceutical Press, London,
pp. 134, 1239.
49 Rothermich NO. (1966) Lancet ii, 640.
50 Hartshorn EA. (1972) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 6 , 130.
51 Perucca E, Richens A. (1981) Drugs 21, 120.
52 Backmann K et al. (1984) Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol46, 207.
53 Brennan RW et al. (1970) Neurology 20, 687.
54 Kutt H et al. (1970) Am Rev Resp Dis 101, 377.
55 Johnson J, Freeman HL. (1975) Br J Psychiatry 129, 511.
56 Jensen JC, Gugler R. (1985) Clin Pharmacol Ther 37, 407.
57 Blyden GT et al. (1986) Clin Pharmacol Ther 39, 181.
58 Heipertz R, Pilz H. (1978) J Neurol218, 297.
59 Fincham RW et al. (1976) Neurology 26, 879.
60 Wagner JC, Slama TG. (1984) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 18, 497.
61 Kay L et al. (1985) Br J Clin Pharmacol20, 323.
62 Siersbaek-Nielsen K et al. (1973) Clin Pharmacol Ther 14, 148.
63 Cadle RM, Zenon GJ 111. (1994) A n n Pharmacother 28, 191.
64 Kater RMH et al. (1969) A m J Med Sci 258, 35.
65 McElnay JC et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 13, 501.
66 British National Formulary. (March 1996) No. 31, Appendix 1.
67 Hansen JM et al. (1971) Clin Pharmacol Ther 12, 539.

360

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

68 Christiansen J, Dam M. (1973) Acta Neurol Scand 49, 543.
69 Riddell JG et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol9, 118P.
70 Cucinell SA et al. (1963) J Pharmacol Exp Ther 141, 157.
71 Monks A, Richens A . (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 17, 89.
72 Frigo GM et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol8, 553.
73 Dahlqvist R et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol8, 547.
74 Williams K. (1973) Across the Straits, London, Duckworths. The painter Kyffin Williams
R A describes dramatically his own experiences as an epileptic of anticonvulsant/alcohol
interaction.
75 Dillard ML et al. (1992) Annals Pharmacother 26, 263.
76 Woodcock BG et al. (1991) N Engl J Med 325, 1179.
77 Rahn KH et al. (1985) N Engl J Med 312, 920.
78 Rutledge DR et al. (1988) J Pharmacol Exp Ther 246, 7.
79 Werk EE et al. (1969) N Engl J Med 281, 32.
80 Boylan JJ et al. (1976) J A M A 235, 803.
81 Aito ML et al. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacol 11, 279.
82 Kessler JM et al. (1982) Clin Pharm 1, 263.
83 Neuvonen PJ, Penttila 0. (1974) Br Med J 1, 535.
84 Penttila 0 et al. (1974) Br Med J 2 , 470.
8.5 Tong TG et al. (1981) A n n Intern Med 94, 349.
86 Begg EJ et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 14, 219.
87 Kobayashi K et al. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol40, 481-485.
88 Notelovitz M et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 788.
89 Oral Contraceptives. (1974) Bulletin Vol 5, No 3, Health Protection Branch, Depart. of
Health and Welfare, Canada.
90 Janz D, Schmidt D. (1974) Lancet i , 1113.
91 Coulam CB, Annegers JF. (1979) Epilepsia 20, 519.
92 Pond SM, Kretschzmar KM. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 30, 680.
93 Reynolds EH et al. (1975) Br Med J 2 , 594.
94 Sackellares JC et al. (1979) Epilepsia 20, 697.
95 Marquis JF et al. (1982) N Engl J Med 307, 1189.
96 Adebayo GI. (1988) Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 15, 883.
97 Marquis JF et al. (1982) N Engl J Med 307, 1189.
98 Mendeles L et al. (1979) J Allergy Clin Immunol63, 156.
99 Freeman DJ et al. (1984) Br J Clin Pharmacol 18, 887.
100 Carstensen H et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol21, 550.
101 Hempel E, Klinger W. (1976) Drugs 12, 442.
102 Mattson RH, Cramer JA. (1985) Epilepsia 26 (Suppl l), S40.
103 Jain KK. (1993) J Roy SOCMed 86, 133.
104 Mesdjan E et al. (1980) Epilepsia 21, 489.
105 Dravet C et al. (1977) Lancet i , 810.
106 Straughan J. (1982) S A f r Med J 61, 420.
107 Block SH. (1982) Pediatrics 69, 494.
108 Overweg J et al. (1984) Epilepsia 25, 217.
109 Macphee GJA et al. (1986) Lancet i, 700.
110 Levine M et al. (1985) Neurology 35, 562.
111 Telerman-Toppet N et al. (1981) A n n Intern Med 94, 544.
112 Dam M et al. (1977) Acta Neurol Scand 56, 603.
113 Clarke-Schmidt AL et al. (1990) Am J Hosp Pharm 47, 2034.
114 Cacek AT et al. (1986) Am J Hosp Pharm 43, 689.
115 Summers VM, Grant R. (1989) Pharm J 243, 181.
116 Hirschfeld S, Jarosinski P. (1993) A n n Intern Med 118, 907.
117 May CA et al. (1982) Clin Pharrn 1 , 244.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH AGENTS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF EPILEPSY

361

118 Orr JM et al. (1982) Clin Pharmacol Ther 31, 642.
119 Farrell K et al. (1982) J Pediatr 101, 142.
120 Dhillon S, Richens A. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacoll3, 553.
121 Dhillon S, Richens A. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacoll2, 591.
122 Pate1 I H et al. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 27, 515.
123 Marescaux C et al. (1982) Epilepsia 23, 297.
124 Sackellares JC et al. (1979) Epilepsia 20, 697.
125 Ratnaike RN et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol22, 100.
126 Verity CM, Hosking G , Easter DJ. (1995) Dev Med Child Neurol37, 97-108.
127 Davis R et al. (1994) Drugs 47, 332.
128 Grant SM, Heel RC. (1991) Drugs 41, 889.
129 Srinivasan J, Richens A. (1994) Drug Safety 10, 395.
130 Goa KL, Serkin EM. (1993) Drugs 46, 409.
131 Chadwick D et al. (1994). Lancet 343, 89-91.
132 Goa KL et al. (1993) Drugs 46, 152.
133 Lamotrigine. Reviews in Contemporary Pharmacotherapy 5 , 67-151, 1994 (a series of
articles on lamotrigine).
134 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-1996) Data Pharm Publications London, pp.
1559-61 (valproate).
135 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-1996) Data Pharm Publications London, pp.
1933-1935 (lamotrigine).
136 Graves NM et al. (1989) Epilepsia 30, 225.
137 Reidenberg P et al. (1994) J Clin Pharmacol34, 1016.
138 Wagner ML et nl. (1994) Clin Pharmacol Therap 56, 494.
139 Wagner ML et al. (1993) Clin Pharmacol Therap 53, 536.
140 Reidenberg P et al. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol40, 157.
141 Offerhaus L. (1986) In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP (eds) Iatrogenic Diseases, 3rd edn, Oxford
University Press, p. 349.
142 McArthur J. (1967) Br Med J 3, 162.
143 Meyers FH et al. (1968) Review of Medical Pharmacology, Los Altos, Lange Medical
Publications, p. 111.
144 Kay L et al. (1985) Br J Clin Pharmacol20, 323.
145 Shepherd M et al. (1968) Clinical Psychopharmacology, Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger,
p. 141.
146 Betts TA et al. (1968) Lancet i, 390.
147 Dallos V, Heathfield K. (1969) Br Med J 4, 80.
148 Houghton AWJ. (1971) Lancet i, 138.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

4.5 INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED
IN THE TREATMENT OF
PARKINSONISM
Three main pharmacological classes of drug are used in the treatment of parkinsonism (1).

I. DOPAMINERGIC AGENTS
In idiopathic parkinsonism, progressive degeneration of the pigmented cells of the
substantia nigra are associated with a deficiency of the neurotransmitter dopamine.
The pathogenesis of this is obscure and therapy with dopaminergic agents is simply
an attempt to correct the neurohumoral imbalance.

1. Levodopa
Levodopa used with a dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor is the treatment of choice for
patients with disabling idiopathic Parkinson’s disease. Levodopa is the amino acid
precursor of dopamine, and acts by replenishing the depleted striatol dopamine.
Levodopa has a greater effect on bradykinesia and rigidity than on parkinsonian
tremor.
Levodopa is usually administered with an extra-cerebral dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor which prevents the peripheral degradation of levodopa to dopamine. Dopamine unlike levodopa does not cross the blood-brain barrier. By preventing the
peripheral degradation of levodopa, higher effective levels of levodopa reach the
brain where it is converted to dopamine. At the same time, since lower doses of
levodopa can be administered, the peripheral side effects of levodopa which are
principally nausea, vomiting, etc., are reduced. There is also less delay in the onset
of clinical response to treatment. An increased incidence of abnormal involuntary
movements especially of mouth, jaw and tongue is a disadvantage of the use of
peripheral dopa-decarboxylase inhibitors.
The extra-cerebral dopa-decarboxylase inhibitors in clinical use are given in fixed
combinations with levodopa. Benserazide is given in a fixed ratio of 1 part benserazide with 4 parts levodopa by weight, and the combination is known as co-beneldopa.
Carbidopa is given with levodopa in ratios of either 1 part carbidopa to 10 parts
levodopa or 1 part carbidopa to 4 parts levodopa, irrespective of the ratio the two
agents in combination is known as co-careldopa. The fact that two different ratios
exist under the same British Approved Name (BAN) (1) is a serious risk factor and

363

364

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

is yet another reason why the British Pharmacopoeia’s introduction of co-names
for combination products is to be condemned on safety grounds.
Improvement of parkinsonism with levodopa may occur over 6-18 months and
such improvement may be sustained for up to 2 years. Particularly troublesome to
patients is the ‘on-off ’ effect which is characterized by fluctuations of performance
during the ‘on’ period and incapacitating weakness and akinesia during the ‘off’
periods which may last up to 4 hr. The ‘on-off’ effect increases in frequency as
duration of treatment increases.

2. Selegiline (16)
Selegiline is a monoamine oxidase-B inhibitor which may be used in early treatment
of parkinsonism or in patients on levodopa to smooth the symptoms of the ‘onoff’ effect. Selegiline inhibits the breakdown of dopamine in the brain. It also
inhibits the re-uptake of dopamine at the presynaptic dopamine receptors. These
effects potentiate dopaminergic function in the brain and help to prolong the
effect of both endogenous and exogenous dopamine. Unlike conventional M A 0
inhibitors, which inhibit both MAO-A and MAO-B enzyme, the selectivity of
selegiline for the MAO-B enzyme means it can be safely given with levodopa
without risk of a hypertensive crisis. Selegiline may be administered with levodopa
alone or in combination with a peripheral dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor. Similarly
there are no dietary restrictions with selegiline and tyramine containing foods.

3. Apomorphine (17)
Apomorphine is a potent dopamine agonist for both D1 and D2 receptors and is
used for refractory motor fluctuations in Parkinson’s disease, i.e. ‘on-off’ episodes.
Apomorphine has an onset of action following subcutaneous injection of 5-10
min and may prevent or terminate an ‘off’ episode. Side effects associated with
apomorphine are emesis, nausea, retching, yawning and sedation.

4. Dopaminergic Agents, e.g. Bromocriptine (19), Lysuride (20), Pergolide (21)
These are all thought to work by direct stimulation of surviving dopamine receptors.
All these dopaminergic drugs may cause serious neuropsychiatric side effects and
have been reported to cause retroperitoneal fibrosis (1, 19).

5. Amantidine (17)
Amantidine has a modest effect on bradykinetic disabilities as well as on tremor
and rigidity. Unfortunately relatively few patients experience benefits from this
agent, which started its clinical use as an antiviral, and is relatively free of adverse
effects.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF PARKINSONISM

365

11. ANTIMUSCARINIC DRUGS USED IN PARKINSONISM
Antimuscarinic drugs exert their effect by correcting the relative excess of cholinergic effects which occurs as a result of dopamine deficiency. They are less effective
than levodopa in Parkinson’s disease but may be a useful supplement to therapy.
In most patients their effect is only moderate and limited to a reduction of tremor
and rigidity without effect on bradykinesia. The most commonly used antimuscarinic
agents are:
benzhexol hydrochloride
benztropine mesylate
biperiden
orphenadrine hydrochloride
procyclidine hydrochloride

No important differences exist between these drugs but patients may find one or
other suits them better. It has been claimed that this group has a greater therapeutic
effect in post-encephalitic parkinsonism than in idiopathic parkinsonism. Tardive
dyskinesia is not improved by antimuscarinic agents and may in fact be made worse.

111. DRUG USED TO CONTROL TREMOR
A variety of agents (1) have been tried to control tremor. Tetrabenzine acts by
depleting nerve endings of dopamine. Other agents used have included benzhexol,
haloperidol, pimozide, sulpiride, P-adrenergic blocking agents, primidone, and piracetam.
Combination

LEVODOPA
Antidepressant/levodopa
(MA01 or tricyclic)

Interaction

The combination of a MA01 and an amine precursor,
such as levodopa, is potentially dangerous as it may
evoke a hypertensive crisis due to increased storage
and release of either dopamine or noradrenaline, or
both (2, 3). In contrast, it had been thought that the
tricyclic antidepressants imipramine and amitriptyline
could be given to patients taking levodopa without fear
of a harmful pressor effect (3). However, a
hypertensive crisis has been observed following the
administration of co-careldopa (Sinemet) and
metoclopramide to a patient on amitriptyline (4), and
this interaction has been confirmed by the reports of
similar adverse responses (5). It has been suggested

366

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Antidepressant/levodopa
cont.

Interaction

that the effect of biogenic amines in the CNS is
potentiated by tricyclic antidepressants via the
blockade of their major route of physiological
inactivation, i.e. the re-uptake by the presynaptic
nerve terminals.
MAOIs and levodopa should not be given
concomitantly, nor within 2 weeks of stopping
treatment with a MA01 drug. If necessary, the
treatment recommended for this interaction is the use
of a short acting a-adrenergic blocking agent, for
example phentolamine. It is also now apparent that
levodopa can enter into potentially dangerous
interactions with tricyclic antidepressants also leading
to a hypertensive crisis. Treatment of this is as
described for MAOIs.

Antihypertensive
agent/levodopa (6)

Levodopa potentiates the hypotensive effects of
guanethidine and reserpine-containing preparations;
the CNS-depressant actions of reserpine are also
enhanced. Reserpine may cause parkinsonism in its
own right since it induces dopamine depletion in the
brain, which is in direct opposition to the action of
levodopa in relieving parkinsonism. Reserpine
therefore antagonizes levodopa (7, 8). Methyldopa
may also diminish the effects of levodopa in
parkinsonism, but together they have enhanced
hypotensive effects; although severe hypotension has
not been reported (9, 10).

P-Adrenergic blocking
drug/levodopa (11)

The effects of combined therapy with levodopa and
propranolol were studied in 25 parkinsonian patients in
whom tremor was a dominant clinical feature. When
the drugs were given together tremor was rapidly
reduced or abolished in all except two patients who
had undergone thalamotomy. Improvement was
sustained during follow-up periods ranging from 6
months to 2 years. Not less than 60 mg of propranolol
were administered daily in three or four divided doses.
The action of propranolol is thought to be directly on
the tremorigenic neurohumoral system. There is
experimental evidence to suggest that

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF PARKINSONISM

Combination

367

Interaction

propranolol exerts a central action on the reticular
formation independently of the metabolism of
catecholamines (12). This effect is probably common
to all P-adrenergic blockers which cross the bloodbrain barrier. (Practolol which does not cross the
blood-brain barrier had no such effect.)

Benzodiazepines/levodopa Levodopa antagonizes the effects of chlordiazepoxide
diazepam, lorazepam (1, 6, 13-15).
A parkinsonian patient, stabilized successfully with
levodopa (500 mg six times daily), who experienced a
marked reduction in response to levodopa after taking
chlordiazepoxide (10 mg tid) for 2 weeks. Her
Parkinsonism worsened and she had coarse tremor and
rigidity and could not walk straight. Five days after
chlordiazepoxide was stopped, her Parkinson’s disease
was again well controlled. The mechanism of this
interaction is not known.
Isoniazid/levodopa (16)

Some evidence has been presented to suggest that
isoniazid and levodopa may interact to produce a
hypertensive reaction similar to that produced by the
cheese-isoniazid interaction (17), which is itself similar
to the established MAOI-cheese interaction.

Pyridoxine (vitamin
B6)/levodopa (18)

Pyridoxine reduces the effect of levodopa in the
treatment of parkinsonism. Pyridoxine is a codecarboxylase and by facilitating the decarboxylation
of levodopa it reduces its blood level. Pyridoxine is
commonly included in multivitamin preparations.
Pyridoxine and pyridoxine-containing formulations
should not be given to patients on levodopa therapy.

Selegiline/levodopa (19)

Selegiline does not alter the distribution or elimination
of levodopa in young healthy male volunteers.

Tranquillizer/levodopa
e.g.
phenothiazines (20, 21)
butyrophenones (8)
thioxanthenes (8)

All three groups of tranquillizers interfere with central
amine mechanisms; combinations with levodopa should
therefore be avoided where possible. Phenothiazines
may reduce the effects of levodopa.

368

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbinarion

TranquillizerAevodopa
cont.

Interaction

Phenothiazines can cause parkinsonism in their own
right.
Avoid these combinations where possible. If, however,
the combined administration is considered essential,
extreme care should be exercized and a close watch
kept for any signs of potentiation, antagonism of other
interactions and for any unusual side effects. It should
also be noted that some antihistamines are
phenothiazine derivatives (e.g. promethazine,
dimethothiazine, methdilazine, trimeprazine) and
might therefore be expected to diminish the effects of
levodopa if given concomitantly.

SELEGILLINE
Levodopahelegilline
(19, 22-25)

MAOI/selegilline (22)

Selegilline does not alter the distribution of levodopa
or its elimination in healthy young male volunteers. A
major study conducted on behalf of the Parkinson’s
Disease Research Group of the United Kingdom (23)
found a 60% increase in mortality in 271 patients with
early mild Parkinsons disease treated with selegilline
plus levodopa (76 deaths, 28.0% mortality) compared
with 249 patients treated with levodopa alone (44
deaths, 17.7% mortality) in the study period.
Parkinson’s disease is not usually associated with a
high mortality in its early stages and the mortality in
both groups in this study was very high. No reasonable
explanation for these findings were advanced. The
results of this study (23) is at variance with the findings
of other workers (24, 25). Maki-Ikola et al. (24) found
a 2.8% mortality over 3.5 years in 936 patients treated
with levodopa plus selegilline for Parkinson’s disease
compared with a 3.3% mortality in the same period in
1093 patients treated with levodopa alone or placebo.
Olanow and Godbold (25) found a 10% mortality in a
group of 50 patients with Parkinson’s disease who had
not received selegilline compared with a 5.9%
mortality in a group of 51 patients who had received
selegilline .
Selegilline should not be given with non-selective
M A 0 1 inhibitors.

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF PARKINSONISM

Combination

369

Interaction

Pethidine/selegilline (22)

Hyperpyrexia and CNS effects have been reported.

SSRIs
fluoxetine/selegilline
(22)

Hypertension and CNS excitation have been reported
with fluoxetine, but this could be a general reaction
with all SSRIs.

APOMORPHINE
Antipsychotic agents/
apomorphine
e.g. phenothiazines
(1, 26)

AMANTIDINE
Antihypertensives
methyldopa/amantidine

Apomorphine antagonizes the effects of antipsychotic
agents. Apomorphine can lead to neuropsychiatric
disturbances itself and should not be given to patients
with pre-existing pschiatric problems, or dementias due
to other pathological problems.

Increased risk of extrapyramidal side effects (1, 27).

Antipsychotics
phenothiazinedamantidine
Metoclopramide/amantidine

Tetrabenazine/amantidine

DOPAMINERGIC AGENTS: e.g. BROMOCRIPTINE (19), LYSURIDE (20) AND
PERGOLIDE (21)
Alcohol/dopaminergic
Alcohol reduces bromocriptine tolerance.
agents (28-30)
Antibiotics/dopaminergic Erythromycin increases bromocriptine plasma levels
agents (28-30)
and increases toxicity.
e.g. erythromycin
Antipsychotic drugs/
dopaminergic agents
(28-30)

Bromocriptine, lysuride and pergolide antagonize the
therapeutic action of the major antipsychotic agents.
Antipsychotic agents, such as phenothiazines
butyrophenones, thioxanthines, haloperidol and

370

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antipsychotic drugs/
dopaminergic agents
cont.

sulpiride, antagonize the antiparkinson and
hypoprolactinaemic actions of bromocriptine.

Metoclopramide/
dopaminergic agents
(28-30)

Metoclopramide antagonizes the effectiveness of
bromocriptine and pergolide.

ANTIMUSCARINIC AGENTS
Antidepressants/
MAOIs interact with antimuscarinic agents and cause
Antimuscarinic agents
dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary hesitancy, urinary
e.g. monoamine oxidase retention and constipation.
inhibitors and tricyclic
Tricyclic antidepressants can similarly interact, but
antidepressants (1, 31)
have additionally been reported to cause glaucoma and
paralytic ileus.
Antiarrhythmicd
Antimuscarinic agents
(1, 31)

Disopyramide causes increased antimuscarinic side
effects.

Antimuscarinic agents delay the absorption of
mexiletine.
Antifungald
Antimuscarinic agents
(~31)

Antimuscarinics delay the absorption of ketoconazole.

Sublingual nitrate
tablets/antimuscarinic
agents (1, 31)

Reduced effect of sublingual nitrate tablets due to dry
mouth causing failure to dissolve under the tongue.

REFERENCES

1 British National Formulary. (1994) No. 27, British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britian (London), Appendix 1: Interactions.
2 Birkmayer W, Hornykiewicz 0. (1962) Arch Psychiat Nervenkr 203, 560.
3 Hunter KR et al. (1970) Br Med J 3, 388.
4 Rampton DS. (1977) Br Med J 2 , 607.
5 Edwards M. (1982) Practitioner 226, 1447.
6 Hunter KR et al. (1970) Lancet ii, 1283.
7 Hunter KR et al. (1970) Lancet ii, 441.
8 ABPI Data sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 324326 (Levodopa).

INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT OF PARKINSONISM

371

9 Vaidya RA et al. (1970) Metabolism 19, 1069.
10 Gibberd FB, Small E. (1973) Br Med J 2, 90.
11 Kissel P et al. (1974) Lancet i, 403.
12 Dewhurst WG, Marley E. (1965) Br J Pharmacol Chemother 25, 705.
13 Schwarz GA, Fahn S. (1970) Med Clin N A m 54, 773.
14 Mackie L. (1971) Br Med J 2, 651.
15 Wodak J et al. (1972) Med JAust 2, 1277.
16 Morgan JP. (1980) Ann Intern Med 92, 434.
17 Lejonc LJ et al. (1979) Ann Intern Med 91, 793.
18 Duvoisin RC et al. (1969) Trans Am Neurol Assoc 94, 81.
19 Roberts J et al. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol40, 404-406.
20 Barbeau A. (1969) Can Med Assoc J 101, 791.
21 Editorial. (1970) Br Med J 1, 446.
22 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 320321 (selegiline).
23 Lees AJ, on behalf of the Parkinson’s Disease Research Group of the United Kingdom.
(1995) Br Med J 311, 1602.
24 Maki-Ikola 0 et al. (1996) Br Med J 312, 702.
25 Olanow CW, Godbald JH. (1996) Br Med J 312, 703.
26 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 31719 (apomorphine).
27 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 5789 (amantidine).
28 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 138890 (bromocriptine).
29 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 133031 (lisuride).
30 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 79596 (pergolide).
31 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 72627 (benzhexol).

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 5
Drug Interactions with Antimicrobial Agents
The variety of chemical families represented as having antibacterial, antifungal or
antiviral activities are legion. In this chapter the families of compounds with clinical
antibacterial actions are presented alphabetically (15 such families potential for
interactions with other drugs in vivo are reviewed). The antituberculous, antifungal
and antiviral agents are presented by therapeutic activity.

5.1. AMINOGLYCOSIDES
INN approved name:
Amikacin
"Capreomycin
Gentamicin
Kanamycin

Neomycin
Netilmicin
*Streptomycin
Tobramycin

*Used as antituberculous agents.
The major adverse effects of this group of antibiotics are nephrotoxocity and ototoxicity. The risk of ototoxicity is enhanced if two aminoglycoside antibiotics are coadministered; the risk of nephrotoxocity is increased if an aminoglycoside antibiotic
is administered with a polymyxin such as colistin or systemic antifungal agents such
as amphotericin B or the glycopeptide antibiotics, vancomycin or telcoplanin, and
cisplatin (see reviews by Barclay and Begg (1944), Begg and Barclay (1995) and
Duffnell and Begg (1994), for publication details, see Recommended further reading
section).

373

374

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Bisphosphonated
aminoglycoside
antibiotics (1-4)
e.g.
disodium etidronate
disodium pamidronate
disodium clodronate

Co-administration of aminoglycoside antibiotics with
bisphosphonates can lead to severe hypocalcaemia.
Aminoglycosides and bisphosphonates can induce
hypocalcaemia by different mechanisms, these effects
can summate. The warning about interactions between
bisphosphonates and aminoglycoside antibiotics is
given in the British National formulary (1) but not in
the relevant bisphosphonate data sheets of the ABPI
Data Sheet Compendium 1995-96 (2-4).

Cephalosporins/
aminogl ycoside
antibiotics ( 5 )

The potential nephrotoxicity of cephalosporins may be
increased by gentamicin.

Cholinergic
agentdaminoglycoside
antibiotics (1)
e.g.
neostigmine
ph ysostigmine
distigmine bromide
pyridostigmine bromide

Aminoglycosides can antagonize the effects of
cholinergic agents, such as neostigmine used in
myaesthenia gravis or physostigmine used as
eyedrops for glaucoma.

Cisplatin/aminoglycoside Increased risk of both nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity
antibiotics (1)
when cisplatin is used at the same time as an
aminoglycoside antibiotic.
Digoxin/aminoglycoside
antibiotics (18)

Neomycin impairs the absorption of digoxin.

Diuretics/aminoglycoside
antibiotics e.g.
ethacrynic acid
frusemide (1, 5-10)

Increased risk of ototoxicity if loop diuretics are used
with aminoglycoside antibiotics (also with colistin and
vancomycin) .

Heparin/aminoglycoside
antibiotics (32-34)

Aminoglycoside activity is inhibited by heparin.
Tobramycin, gentamicin and netilmicin are all affected
by heparin.

Muscle
Aminoglycosides potentiate the effects of nonrelaxants/aminoglycoside depolarizing muscle relaxants such as tubocurarine.
antibiotics

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

Combination

e.g.
decamethonium
succinylcholine
tubocurarine
(1, 5, 10-12, 18-29)

375

Interaction

Kanamycin, neomycin, tobramycin, viomycin and the
streptomycins have all been shown to produce
neuromuscular blockade and also to potentiate skeletal
muscle relaxant drugs. Neomycin, streptomycin and
viomycin produce a curare-like blockade. Kanamycin
produces a de-polarizing neuromuscular block.
Neuromuscular blockade produced by aminoglycosides
is enhanced in circumstances of K+ depletion or low
ionized Ca2+. Intravenous Ca2+ can be useful in
reversing blockade but cholinergics such as
edrophonium are of little use. These reactions and
prolonged respiratory paralysis are more common in
patients with myasthenia gravis or Parkinson’s disease
(19).

Penicillins/aminoglycoside Neomycin has been shown to inhibit the intestinal
antibiotics
absorption of penicillin V (phenoxymethyl penicillin)
( 5 , 13, 14, 18, 30, 31)
(13). There is reason to suppose that absorption of
penicillin G would be similarly affected (14).

Ticarcillin has been shown to reduce the antibacterial
activity of gentamicin in vivo. If the two agents are
clinically indicated, they should be given at different
times (5).

Gentamicin and carbenicillin are incompatible when
mixed in vitro. Lower blood levels of gentamicin than
expected are achieved by such admixture (30, 31).

Oral contraceptives/
aminoglycoside
antibiotics (18)

Neomycin may impair the absorption of oral
contraceptives, whose efficacy is therefore reduced
giving rise to a risk of unwanted pregnancy.

Vitamin
K/aminoglycoside
antibiotics
(10, 15-17)

Aminoglycoside antibiotics have been shown to
decrease vitamin K production by the intestinal flora
and thus increase the prothrombin time.

376

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

5.2. CEPHALOSPORINS AND RELATED P-LACTAM ANTIBIOTICS
INN approved name:
Atreonam
Ceftazidime
Cefaclor
Ceftizoxime
Cefadroxil
Ceftriaxone
Cefixime
Cefuroxime
Cefodizime
Cephalexin
Cefoperazone
Cephamandole
Cefotaxime
Cephazolin
Cefoxitin
lmipenem (with Cilastatin)
Cefpodoxime
Latamoxef
Cefsuladin

As a group, the cephalosporins do not create major problems due to interactions
but individual members of the group have some specific interactions.

Combination

Interaction

AlcohoYcephalosporin
antibiotics
e.g.
cephamandole
cefoperazone
latamoxef
(1, 35-37)

‘Antabuse-like’ effects have been reported in patients
taking concomitant cephalosporins and other p-lactam
antibiotics. The antibiotics incriminated are
cephamandole, cefoperazone and latamoxef.

Anticoagulants/
cephalosporin antibiotics
e.g.
cephamandole
latamoxef
(1, 35, 39)

Anticoagulant effect of warfarin and nicoumalone
enhanced by cephamandole and others, including
latamoxef.
Latamoxef has been associated with serious bleeding
and hypoprothrombinaemia even in patients who have
not been anticoagulated. The risk of serious adverse
reaction in anticoagulated patients cannot be
underestimated.

Colistidcephalosporin
antibiotics (38)

The combination of cephalosporin antibiotics with
colistin (a polymyxin antibiotic) is alleged to increase
risk of renal damage.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

377

Combination

Interaction

Hz antagonists/
cephalosporin antibiotics
(1)

H2 antagonists reduce the absorption of cefpodoxime.

Probenecidcephalosporin Probenecid increases the plasma levels of most
antibiotics (1, 39, 40)
cephalosporin antibiotics due to reduced renal
clearance.
5.3. CHLORAMPHENICOL AND THIAMPHENICOL
INN approved name:
Chloramphenicol
Thiamphenicol
The drug interactions referred to below refer to systemic use of chloramphenicol
and not to use of ophthalmic preparations.
Combination

Interaction

Anticoagulants/
chloramphenicol
e.g.
warfarin
nicoumalone
phenindione
(16, 41)

Chloramphenicol decreases the vitamin K production
by intestinal bacteria and also directly inhibits the
metabolism of coumarin anticoagulants in the liver.
Both mechanisms of action enhance the anticoagulant
effect of coumarins.

Antidiabetic agents/
chloramphenicol
e.g.
sulphonylurea
hypoglycaemic agents
(41, 42)

Chloramphenicol2 g/day for 10 days has been shown
to result in a three-fold increase in the half-life of
tolbutamide and other sulphonylurea derivatives.
Profound hypoglycaemia can ensue (41).
Similarly, chloramphenicol increased the half-life of
chlorpropamide from 30-36 to a range of 40-146 hr
(42).

Antiepileptic agents/
chloramphenicol
e.g.
phenobarbitone
phenytoin
(41, 43, 44)

Chloramphenicol’s metabolism is accelerated by the
enzyme-inducing effects of phenobarbitone leading to
reduced chloramphenicol plasma levels. Conversely,
chloramphenicol inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
phenytoin which may be given to epileptics with
phenobarbitone. Phenytoin plasma levels can rise to
such an extent that toxicity occurs. (A study in two

378

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antiepileptic agents/
chloramphenicol cont.

patients showed phenytoin half-life to increase from
9.0 and 10.5 hr to 12. 5 and 22.0 hr, respectively (41).)

Phenytoin can also lead to increases in the blood levels
of chloramphenicol due to competition for hepatic
metabolic binding sites. This has been associated with
blood dyscrasias.

Cimetidine/
chloramphenicol
(45, 46)

Fatal aplastic anaemia of unusually precipitate onset
has been reported in two patients who received
intravenous chloramphenical and cimetidine
simultaneously.

Cyclophosphamide/
chloramphenicol (47)

Administration of chloramphenicol prior to
cyclophosphamide prolonged the mean
cyclophosphamide half-life from 7.5 to 11.5 hr.

Oral contraceptives/
chloramphenicol (48)

Isolated cases of unwanted pregnancy have been
reported in women on oral contraception who have
received chloramphenicol.

ParacetamoV
chloramphenicol
(49-56)

Contradictory reports of the presence or absence of
an interaction between paracetamol and
chloramphenicol have appeared in the literature.
Prescott (1996) reviewed the literature of seven papers,
three showed no effect, one showed greatly increased
paracetamol half-life from 3.25 to 15.0 hr (50). This
was attributed to competition for glucuronide
conjugation. Three (53-55) showed an increased rate
of paracetamol metabolism.

Penicillin antibiotics/
chloramphenicol

Bacteriostatic and bactericidal antibiotics should not be
combined. A bacteriostatic agent such as
chloramphenicol can inhibit the bactericidal actions of
penicillins.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

379

5.4. CLINDAMYCIN
INN approved name:
Clindamycin

The propensity of clindamycin to produce pseudomembranous colitis limits clinical
usefulness.
Combination

Interaction

Cholinergics/clindamycin Antagonizes the effect of neostigmine used in
e.g.
myasthenia gravis and pyridostigmine used in
neostigmine
glaucoma.
pyridostigmine (1)
Muscle relaxants/
clindamycin (1, 63, 64)

Potentiates the effect of non-depolarizing muscle
relaxants such as tubocurarine and fazidinium bromide.

5.5. FUSIDIC ACID
INN approved name:
Sodium fusidate

Sodium fusidate is excreted mainly in the bile, little or none being excreted in the
urine. The manufacturer recommends that caution is used if sodium fusidate is
administered with other antibiotics which have a similar biliary excretion pathway,
e.g. lincomycin and rifampicin. Although fusidic acid has been shown to displace
bilirubin from plasma binding which could be relevant with respect to displacement
of other drugs from plasma binding, no interactions of clinical relevance have been
reported.
5.6. GLYCOPEPTIDE ANTIBIOTICS
INN approved name:
Vancomycin
Teicoplanin

Both vancomycin and teicoplanin have been reported to show ototoxicity and
vancomycin can cause nephrotoxicity and renal failure.
Combination

Interaction

Anaesthetic agents/
glycopeptide antibiotics
(65)

Concomitant administration of vancomycin and
anaesthetic agents has been associated with erythema,
histamine-like flushing and anaphylactoid reactions.

380

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Aminoglycosides/
glycopeptide (66)

Interaction

Teicoplanin is claimed not to have synergistic ototoxic
or nephrotoxic effects with aminoglycoside antibiotics.
Consequently teicoplanin with gentamicin is
recommended as an alternative to vancomycin and
gentamicin for endocarditis prophylaxis.

5.7. IMIDAZOLES

Imidazole antibacterials
INN approved name:
Metronidazole
Tinidazole
Imidazole antifungals
INN approved name:
*Clotrimazole
*Econazole
Fluconazole
Isoconazole
Itraconazole

Ketoconazole
Miconazo1e
*Sulconazole
*Triconazole

*Not used systemically, only as skin or vaginal formulations.
Combination

Interaction

Alcoholhmidazoles
(67, 68)

Metronidazole has pronounced Antabuse effect.
Alcohol should not be taken during or for 48 hr after
metronidazole therapy. Ketoconazole also interacts
with alcohol.

Antacids/imidazoles

Antacids reduce absorption of imidazoles

Anticoagulantshmidazoles Enhanced anticoagulant effect of nicoumalone and
warfarin due to inhibition of metabolism by
(67)
metronidazole. This is due to the stereoselective
inhibition of the metabolism of the S-isomer of
warfarin (124, 125).

Anti-epileptic/
imidazoles (67)

Metronidazole inhibits metabolism of phenytoin and
increases plasma levels. Phenobarbitone accelerates
metabolism of metronidazole. Ketoconazole

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

Combination

381

Interaction

metabolism accelerated by phenytoin and
phenobarbitone.
Cisapride/imidazoles
(246)

Cisapride should not be co-administered with oral or
parenteral fluconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole or
miconazole because of risk of ventricular arrhythmias
and torsade des pointes.

Cytotoxicdimidazoles
(70-78)

Ketoconazole inhibits metabolism (70-79) of
cyclosporin. Metronidazole inhibits the metabolism of
fluorouracil (79).

Disulfiradimidazoles
(80)

Psychotic reactions reported. Imidazoles and disulfiram
inhibit hepatic metabolism.

Lithiudimidazoles
(67, 69)

Increased lithium toxicity has been reported. Two
women experienced toxic reactions to long-term
lithium treatment following the brief use of
metronidazole to treat vaginitis. In both cases marked
increases in urine output were observed and diagnoses
of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus was made.

HI Antagonists/
imidazoles (81, 82, 92,
93)

Metabolism of astemizole and terfenadine inhibited
with increased risk of ventricular arrythmias, including
torsade des pointes.

HzAntagonists/

imidazoles (1, 83)

H2 antagonists, also the protein pump inhibitor
omeprazole, and sucralfate, reduce absorption of
ketoconazole and itraconazole. Cimetidine inhibits the
metabolism of metronidazole and gives increased
metronidazole blood levels with increased CNS side
effects.

Midazoladimidazoles
(84)

Itraconazole was shown to inhibit (84) the hepatic
clearance of midazolam due to impaired hydroxylation.
The area under the curve increased sixfold in a study
of 12 volunteers.

Rifampicinhmidazoles
(85-87)

Rifampicin given by mouth or intravenously has reduced the plasma concentrations of ketoconazole and led
to failure of antifungal treatment. If isoniazid was also
given a further fall in ketoconazole levels occurred (86).

382

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

5.8. MACROLIDE ANTIBIOTICS
INN approved name:
Azithromycin
Clarithromycin
Erythromycin
Josamycin

Midecamycin
01eandomycin
Spiramycin
Triacetyloleandomycin

The most significant interactions of macrolide antibiotics with other therapeutic
substances is due to their ability to inhibit the hepatic metabolism of other substances. The effects on inhibition of cytochrome P450 are most marked after triacetyloleandomycin, marked after erythromycin and clarithromycin and least after
josamycin, midecamycin or spiramycin (88).
combination

Interaction

Analgesicdmacrolide
antibiotic (89)

Plasma concentration of alfentanil (89) increased by
erythromycin.

Antacids/macrolide
antibiotic (89)

Reduce absorption of azithromycin (89) from gut.

Antiarrhythmid
macrolide antibiotic
e.g. disopyramide (90)

Plasma concentration of disopyramide increased by
erythromycin. Ventricular tachycardia and other
ventricular dysrrhythmias have been reported.

Anticoagulants/macrolide Anticoagulant effect of nicoumalone and warfarin
antibiotic
enhanced by macrolide antibiotics due to inhibition of
e.g.
metabolism.
warfarin
nicoumalone (91)

Antihistamines/macrolide
antibiotic
e.g.
astemizole
terfenadine
(81, 82, 92, 93)

Macrolide antibiotics inhibit the metabolism of the
non-sedating antihistamines, astemizole and
terfenadine. This interaction can lead to overdosage
with these antihistamines and cardiotoxicity in the
form of ventricular arrhythmias including torsade des
pointes. (Similar interactions have been reported with
ketoconazole and itraconazole with terfenadine.)

Antiepileptics/macrolide
antibiotic
e.g. carbamazepine
phenytoin (94-98)

Clarithromycin and erythromycin inhibit the
metabolism of carbamazepine and phenytoin and
enhance their potential for side effects.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

Combination

383

Interaction

Benzodiazepined
macrolide antibiotic
e.g. midazolam (1)

Erythromycin inhibits the metabolism of midazolam
and increases the plasma level significantly.

Cardiac glycosided
macrolide antibiotic
e.g. digoxin (99-102)

Erythromycin inhibits the metabolism of digoxin and
can therefore precipitate digoxin toxicity. This is
believed to be partly due to inhibition of hepatic
metabolism, but gut flora also breakdown digoxin and
this is inhibited by erythromycin and tetracyclines.

Cisapride/macrolide
antibiotic (246)

The co-administration of cisapride and erythromycin or
clarithromycin can lead to prolongation of QT interval,
ventricular dyrrhythmia and torsade des pointes.

Corticosteroids/macrolide Due to inhibition of cytochrome P450 the breakdown
antibiotic
of steroid hormones is inhibited.
Cyclosporin/macrolide
antibiotic (103-107)

Erythromycin inhibits the hepatic metabolism of
cyclosporin and increases risk of renal damage.

Ergotamine/macrolide
antibiotic (108-109)

Erythromycin has been reported to inhibit the
metabolism of ergotamine to the extent of producing
clinical ergotism.

Dopaminergicdmacrolide Erythromycin has been shown to inhibit bromocriptine
antibiotic
metabolism. Peak plasma levels were found to be
e.g. bromocriptine
increased by 400% in five healthy subjects.
(110)
Xanthinedmacrolide
antibiotic (111-113)
e.g. theophylline

Triacetyloleandomycin, clarithromycin and
erythromycin inhibit the hepatic metabolism of
theophylline and increase the risk of toxicity. The
kinetics of theophylline were unaltered by josamycin,
midecamycin and spiramycin (114, 115).

Zidovudine/macrolide
antibiotic (1)

Clarithromycin reduces the absorption (1) of
zidovudine.

384

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

5.9. NITROFURANS
INN approved name:
Nitrofurantoin
Interaction

Cornbination

Antacidshitrofurantoin
(1)

Antacids, e.g. magnesium trisilicate reduce
nitrofurantoin absorption.

Anticonvulsantsl
nitrofurantoin
e.g. phenytoin (116)

A fall in serum phenytoin levels and resultant loss of
seizure control has been reported in a patient in whom
nitrofurantoin was added to therapy.

Oral contraceptives/
nitrofurantoin (117)

Nitrofurantoin like other antibiotics may reduce the
efficacy of oral contraceptives.

4-Quinolones/
nitrofurantoin
e.g. nalidixic acid (118)

Nitrofurantoin inhibits the antibacterial action of
nalidixic acid. The concomitant use of these two agents
in urinary tract infections should be avoided.

Uricosuricshitrofurantoin Reduces renal clearance of nitrofurantoin and,
e.g. probenecid (1, 118) therefore, increases its risk of toxicity.

5.10. PENICILLINS
INN approved name:
Benzyl penicillin
Phenoxymethyl penicillin (Penicillin V)
Procaine penicillin

Penicillinase Resistant Penicillins
Cloxacillin
F1uc1oxaciI1in
Temocillin

Broad Spectrum Penicillins
Amoxy ci11in
Ampicillin
Ampicillin + cloxacillin
Bacampicillin

Amoxycillin + clavulanic acid
(Co-fluampicil)
Pivampicillin
Pivampicillin + pivmecillinam

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

385

Antipseudomonal Penicillins
Azlocillin
Carbenicillin
Piperacillin
Ticarcillin

Mecillinams
Pivmecillinam (see combination with pivampicillin)
Very few interactions between penicillins and other medication are clinically significant.
Combination

Interaction

Antaciddpenicillin

Antacids reduce absorption of pivampicillin

AllopurinoVpenicillin
(119-120)

A survey by the Boston Drug Collaborative
Surveillance Program has shown that the
administration of allopurinol to patients receiving
ampicillin or amoxycillin doubled or quadrupled,
respectively, the incidence of rashes.

Anticoagulants/penicillin

Broad spectrum penicillins can potentiate the effect of
anticoagulants by reducing vitamin K synthesis by
bowel flora.

Antimalarial agents/
penicillin

Chloroquine reduces the biavailability of ampicillin
following oral co-administration (126)

Cefotaxime/penicillin
(127-128)

There are reports of encephalopathy and focal seizures
in patients with renal failure given cefotaxime with
azlocillin (127, 128).

Cytotoxics/penicillin
e.g. methotrexate

Penicillins reduce the excretion of methotrexate and
therefore increases the risk of methotrexate toxicity.

Gentamicidpenicillin
(121, 122)

Simultaneous treatment intravenously with carbenicillin
and gentamicin has been shown to cause a profound
fall in gentamicin blood levels. This appears to be an
in vitro interaction.

386

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Guar-gudpeniciliin
(124)

Guar-gum reduces the absorption of phenoxymethyl
penicillin.

Muscle relaxants/
penicillin (1)

Azlocillin increases the effect of non-depolarizing
muscle relaxants such as tubocurarine.

Neomycidpenicillin
( 124)

Oral neomycin has been shown to reduce the
absorption of phenoxymethyl penicillin (Penicillin V)

Probenecidpenicillin
(129)

Probenecid reduces the renal excretion of penicillin.

Oral contraceptives/
penicillin (117)

Pregnancies have been reported in women taking oral
contraceptives who were also given ampicillin. It is
now thought only to occur in women who get
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and therefore
malabsorption of oestrogen and progestogen
components of the ‘Pill’.

5.11. POLYMYXINS
INN approved name:
Colistin
Colistin is not absorbed by mouth and is used in bowel sterilization regimes. It has
to be given by injection to obtain a systemic effect. Interactions are largely as for
aminoglycoside antibiotics (see Part 2, Chapter 1).
Combination

Interaction

Cephalosporidcolistin
(38)

The combination of colistin with a cephalosporin
antibiotic increases the risk of renal damage.

Muscle relaxants/colistin
(130-133)

Colistin enhances neuromuscular blocking effect of
non-depolarizing muscle relaxants, e.g. tubocurarine,
fazidinium bromide, etc. This effect is enhanced by K+
depletion or low ionized serum Ca2+.Cholinergic
agents are of little value in reversing this prolongation
of action.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

387

5.12. 4-QUINOLONES
Products
INN approved name:
Acrosoxacin
Ciprofloxacin
Cinoxacin
Enoxacin

Nalidixic acid
Norfloxacin
Pefloxacin
Ofloxacin

This class of antibacterials enter into interactions because they chelate with cations
such as calcium, magnesium, iron, aluminium and zinc, which reduces their absorption. 4-quinolones inhibit hepatic metabolism.
Combination

Interaction

Combination
Analgesics/NSAIDS/
quinolone antibiotic
(134-136)

Interaction
Both the Japanese and UK regulatory authorities have
issued warnings of an increased risk of convulsions
when 4-quinolones and NSAIDs are administered. The
mechanism of this interaction is not known.

Antacids containing
aluminium, bismuth,
calcium, magnesium
cations
Iquinolone antibiotic
(137, 138)

Cations bind with 4-quinolones to produce a nonabsorbable complex.

Anti-ulcer agent
sucralfate/quinolone
antibiotic
e.g.
cimetidine (139, 140)
ranitidine (141)

Sucralfate releases aluminium cations in the stomach
which causes impaired absorption of 4-quinolones.
Cimetidine has been reported to reduce the clearance
of pefloxacin. Intravenous ranitidine has been reported
to reduce the bioavailability of oral enoxacin.

Anticoagulants/quinolone
antibiotic
e.g.
warfarin
nicoumalone (142-148)

The effect of coumarin anticoagulants is enhanced due
to certain 4-quinolones, namely, ciproflaxacin (142,
143), nalidixic acid (144-146), ofloxacin (147),
enoxacin (148), slowing the hepatic metabolism of
warfarin and nicoumalone.

388

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antidiabetic agents/
quinolone antibiotic
sulphonylurea
(127, 128)

The hepatic metabolism of sulphonylurea antidiabetic
agents is impaired by 4-quinolones. Hypoglycaemic
effect is therefore enhanced.

Iron and zinc salts
also
Milk and dairy
products/quinolone
antibiotic (149-151)

Cations bind with 4-quinolones also and reduce their
absorption. This effect involves iron given for anaemia
and all dairy products, all of which contain Ca2+
cations.

Nitrofurantoin/quinolone Nitrofurantoin inhibits the antibacterial action of
antibiotics (152, 153)
nalidixic acid and other 4-quinolones. The concomitant
use of the two drugs to treat urinary tract infections is
contraindicated.
Penicillins/quinolone
antibiotics (154)

The simultaneous administration of parenteral
ciprofloxacin with azlocillin has resulted in higher and
more prolonged serum concentrations of ciprofloxacin.

Probenecid/quinolone
antibiotics (1)

The renal excretion of cinoxacin is reduced by
probenecid. A similar effect has been described with
nalidixic acid and ciprofloxacin.

Xanthineslquinolone
antibiotics (155-161)

To a greater or lesser extent, all 4-quinolones reduce
the hepatic clearance of xanthines such as theophylline
and caffeine and increase the risk of toxicity. Seizures
have occurred in patients given ciprofloxacin and
theophylline simultaneously.

5.13. SULPHONAMIDES
The use of sulphonamides has decreased in recent years as a result of increasing
bacterial resistance and their replacement by more effective and less toxic alternatives. the large range of sulphonamides once used clinically is now reduced to three
or four.
The principle side effects of this group of drugs is nausea, vomiting, anorexia
and diarrhoea. The more serious adverse reactions include toxic epidermal necrosis,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, lupus erythermatosus, nephrotoxic reactions. Severe
myelosuppression including aplastic anaemia and agranulocytosis are unfortunately
not as rare as some would have us believe. There is little justification for the

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

389

continued use of co-trimoxazole since it has no advantages over trimethoprim alone
(see Cribb et al., 1996).

INN approved name:
Co-trimoxazole (combination of trimethoprim and sulphamethoxazole)
Sulphadiazine
Sulphadimidine
Sulfametopyrazine
Interactions of sulphonamides with other therapeutic agents hinges on their antifolate actions, on their ability to displace other drugs from plasma binding sites, and
on inhibition of a number of metabolic processes.
Combination

Interaction

Anaesthetics1
sulphonamide
e.g. thiopentone (162)

Sulphonamides increase effect of thiopentone due to
reduced plasma binding of thiopentone.

Anticoagulants/
sulphonamide
e.g.
nicoumalone
warfarin (38, 163)

Sulphonamides reduce amount of vitamin K
synthesized by intestinal flora. They also displace
coumarin anticoagulants from plasma protein binding
sites and, by both actions, potentiate their
anticoagulant effect.

Antidiabetic agents/
sulphonamide
e.g.
sulphonylureas
(12, 164-166)

Sulphonamides inhibit the carboxylation of
tolbutamide. They also displace tolbutamide from
plasma protein binding sites. Sulphonamides also
displace chlorpropramide from plasma binding sites.
Hypoglycaemic action enhanced.

Antiepileptic agents1
sulphonamide
e.g. phenytoin
(1, 167-169)

Antifolate effect of phenytoin increased. Plasma
concentration of phenytoin increased. Increased risk of
phenytoin toxicity.

Cyclosporid
sulphonamide (170, 171)

Increased risk of nephrotoxicity when given in
combination. Cyclosporin falls to non-therapeutic
levels, increased risk of rejection of organ transplant.

390

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Cytotoxics/sulphonamide
e.g. methotrexate
(12, 172)

Sulphonamides displace methotrexate from plasma
protein binding sites and thus increase its toxicity.
Sulphonamides also increase antifolate action of
methotrexate.

Local anaesthetics/
sulphonamide
e.g.
amethocaine
benzocaine
butacaine
procaine (173, 174)

Local anaesthetics which are derivatives of p aminobenzoic acid are hydrolyzed in the body to p aminobenzoic acid and should not be used in patients
being treated with sulphonamides. Sulphonamides
exert their antibacterial action by competitive
inhibition of p-aminobenzoic acid in the microorganism.

5.14. TETRACYCLINES
INN approved name:
Tetracycline also compound formulations with Nystatin
Demeclocycline
Doxycycline
Lymecycline
Minocycline
Oxytetracyline
The absorption of tetracyclines is reduced by divalent and trivalent cations, e.g.
aluminium, bismuth, calcium, iron, magnesium and zinc. Such interactions by which
tetracyclines form non-absorbable complexes with these cations wll also affect
certain excipients used in other pharmaceuticals and the calcium in all milk and
dairy products. Dental discolouration is a major disadvantage to their use in pregnancy and children principally affecting non-erupted teeth.
Cornbination

Interaction

Antiulcer drugs/
tetracyclines
e.g.
sucralfate
A12+- and Ca2+containing
antacids (175-177, 180)

Sucralfate releases aluminium cations in the stomach
which leads to impaired tetracycline absorption.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

Combination

391

Interaction

Cimetidineketracyclines
(181-183)

Co-administration of cimetidine 1000 mg daily for 3
days reduced the absorption of tetracycline.

Anticoagulants/
tetracyclines (16, 178)

Tetracyclines have been shown to reduce plasma
prothrombin activity by impairing prothrombin
utilization. Tetracyclines also decrease vitamin K
production by intestinal bacteria. Both these
mechanisms tend to result in potentiation of
anticoagulant activity.

Anticonvulsants/
tetracyclines
e.g.
carbamazepine
phenobarbitone
phenytoin (179, 180)

The plasma half-life of doxycycline in 25 control
subjects was 15.1 hr. In epileptic patients treated with
enzyme-inducing anti-epileptic agents the plasma halflife of doxycyline was of the order of 7.2-7.4 hr.

Oral hypoglycaemic
agentdtetra cyclines
e.g. phenformin
(184, 183, 186)

Tetracyclines given to patients whose diabetes is
controlled on phenformin can produce lactic acidosis.

Iron salts/tetracyclines
(177)

Fe2+ ions impair tetracycline absorption due to
formation of insoluble complexes.

Milk and milk products/
tetracyclines
e.g. cheese and butter
(177)

Ca2+ ions in milk and milk products impair
tetracycline absorption due to the formation of
insoluble complexes.

Digoxidtetracyclines
(187, 188)

Tetracyclines may produce raised plasma levels of
digoxin.

Lithiudtetracyclines
(189)

Tetracyclines may produce raised lithium levels

Penicillins/tetracyclines
(190)

Bactericidal and bacteriostatic antimicrobials should
not be co-administered, since the efficacy of the
bactericidal component is reduced.

392

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Retinoiddtetracyclines
(191-192)

Retinoids, like tetracycline, are used in the treatment
of acne. There is an increased incidence of benign
intracranial hypertension when these agents are coadministered. The mechanism of drug-induced benign
intracranial hypertension is unknown.

A review of the WHO Collaborative Centre data base
and Spontaneous ADR reports to the Committee on
Safety of Medicines and of the world literature
indicated that both tetracyclines alone, retinoids alone,
and the two drugs in combination were one of the
commonest causes of pseudotumour cerebri (191).

5.15. TRIMETHOPRIM
INN approved name:
Trimethoprim (see also Co-trimoxazole)

Combination

Interaction

Anti-arrhythmicd
trimethoprim
(procainamide) (193)

Plasma concentrations of procainamide increased. A
peculiar aseptic meningitis has been reported in
association with trimethoprim therapy.

Anticoagulants/
trimethoprim
(nicoumalone and
warfarin) (189)

Effects of nicoumalone and warfarin are enhanced.

Antidiabeticd
trimethoprim
(sulphonylureas) (193)

Hypoglycaemic effect of sulphonylureas is increased.

Anti-epileptics/
trimethoprim
(phenytoin) (189)

Trimethoprin increases the elimination half-life of
phenytoin (194).

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

393

Combination

Interaction

Antimalarials/
trimethoprim
(pyrimethamine) (193)
Cytotoxics/trimethoprim
(methotrexate) (193)

The antifolate effects of phenytoin, pyrimethamine and
methotrexate are all enhanced by trimethoprim.

Digoxidtrimethoprim
(194)

Trimethoprim increases the elimination half-life of
digoxin.

Rifampicidtrimethoprim
(193, 194)

Rifampicin reduces trimethoprim blood levels.

5.16. ANTITUBERCULOUS AGENTS
INN approved name:

1. Streptomycin
For interactions see aminoglycoside antibiotics.

2. Rifampicin

3. Rifabutin
Most interactions relate to increased metabolic breakdown induced by rifampicin.
Cornbination

Analgesics/rifampicin
(1, 199, 209)

Interaction

Rifampicin increases the metabolism of methadone and
reduces its analgesic effect.

Anticoagulants/rifampicin Metabolism of nicoumalone and warfarin accelerated,
(coumarins) (1, 199)
therefore reduced effect.
Antidepressants/
rifampicin
(tricyclics) (1, 199)

Metabolism of most tricyclic antidepressants
accelerated, therefore reduced effect.

Antidiabetic agents/
rifampicin (1, 199)

Metabolism of sulphonylurea oral hypoglycaemics
increased with reduction in their efficacy.

394

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Anti-epileptics/
rifampicin
e.g.
phenytoin
phenobarbitone (1, 199)

Reduced plasma concentration of phenytoin and loss
of control of epilepsy due to increased rate of
metabolism.

Antibacterials and
antifungaMifampicin
(imidazoles) 199)

Metabolism increased and effectiveness of imidazoles
reduced.

Antipsychotics/rifampicin Rate of metabolism of haloperidol increased and
(haloperidol) (199)
efficacy therefore reduced.
Benzodiazepined
rifampicin (199)

Rate of metabolism increased.

P-adrenergic blockers/
rifampicin (199, 208)

Metabolism of @-blockersincreased.

Calcium channel
blockerdrifampicin
(1, 199)

Metabolism of diltiazam, verapamil and nifedipine
accelerated.

Cardiac glycosides/
rifampicin
(1, 199, 205-207)

Metabolism of digoxin (199, 205) and digitoxin (206,
207) increased with reduced efficacy.

Corticosteroids,
oestrogens and
progestogens/rifampicin
(199-204)

All steroid hormone metabolism and increased.
Reduced efficacy of all oral contraceptives with
increased risk of failure.

Cyclosporidrifampicin
(198)

Increased rate of metabolism of cyclosporin and
reduced immunosuppression and increased risk of
transplant rejection.

H2-blockers/rifampicin
(cimetidine) (199)

Increased rate of metabolism.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

Combination

395

Interaction

Quininekifampicin
(195, 196)

Rifampicin reduced the blood levels of quinine and
increased the rate of elimination six-fold.

Theophyllinehifampicin
(197)

Reduced plasma theophylline level due to increased
metabolism.

Thyroxine/rifampicin
(199)

Increased rate of metabolism may cause increased
requirements to treat hypothyroid patients.

4. Capreomycin
The adverse effects of capreomycin on the eighth nerve and kidney are similar to
the aminoglycoside antibiotics. Capreomycin also has a neuromuscular blocking
effect and may therefore interact with skeletal muscle relaxants.
Combination

Interaction

Antibiotics/capreomycin
(216)

Increased rate of nephrotoxicity with concomitant use
of capreomycin and colistin.

Aminoglycosides and
glycopeptide antibiotics/
capreomycin (216)

Increased rate of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity when
used in combination with an aminoglycoside antibiotic
or vancomycin.

Cytotoxicskapreomycin
(cisplatin) (216)

Capreomycin used in combination with cisplatin carries
an increased risk of both nephrotoxicity and
ototoxicity .

Streptomycin/
capreomycin (216)

This combination carries an increased risk of
ototoxicity above that of either drug given alone.

5. Isoniazid
There is increased risk of isoniazid toxicity in patients who are slow acetylators.
This pharmacogenetic dysmorphism is also relevant in manifestation of interactions.
Most interactions are due to isoniazid- induced metabolic inhibition which is greater
in slow acetylators.
Isoniazid does have monoamine oxidase-inhibiting properties and can thus interact with foods that have a high tyramine content, e.g. Swiss cheese (210), red
wines particularly Chianti (211), tuna fish and other fish with a high histamine
content (212-215).

396

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antacids and
Absorbants/
isoniazid

Reduced absorption of isoniazid.

Antibioticslisoniazid
(cycloserine) (222)

Increased CNS toxicity of cycloserine due to isoniazid
inhibition of its metabolism.

Anti-epileptics/isoniazid
e.g.
carbamazepine
ethosuximide
phenytoin (1, 217-220)

Isoniazid inhibits the hepatic metabolism of these antiepileptics and increases risk of toxicity.

Benzodiazepines/isoniazid Metabolism of diazepam is inhibited.
e.g. diazepam
Xanthineshsoniazid
(theophylline) (221)

Isoniazid increases plasma levels of theophylline.

6. Cycloserine
Cycloserine is contraindicated in patients with epilepsy, depression, renal insufficiency or alcohol abuse.

Combination

Interaction

Alcohokycloserine
(223)

Cycloserine enhances the CNS effects of alcohol and
concurrent use may induce convulsions.

Antibioticdcycloserine
(isoniazid) (222)

Isoniazid increases cycloserine plasma levels due to
inhibition of hepatic metabolism. Therefore, increases
CNS toxicity.

Anti-epileptics1
cycloserine
(phenytoin) (1)

Cycloserine given to epileptics receiving phenytoin
increases plasma concentration of phenytoin with
increased risk of toxicity.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

397

7. Other Antituberculous Agents

Ethambutol
The most important adverse effect of ethambutol is retrobulbar neuritis with a
reduction in visual activity, constriction of the visual field and central scotomata.
Red-green colour blindness also occurs. Neutropoenia may also occur, as may
nephrotoxicity. Cholestatic jaundice has also been reported.

Pyrazinamide
Hepatotoxicity is the most serious adverse reaction with pyrazinamide and, when
given with isoniazid and rifampicin, the incidence is reported to be about 3%. Other
side effects include arthralgia, fever, photosensitivity and rashes.
Combination

Antaciddethambutol
(224)

Interaction

Aluminium cations reduce the absorption of
ethambutol.

Uricosurics/pyrazinamide Probenecid reduces renal clearance of pyrazinamide (1,
(probenecid)
227). Pyrazinamide itself reduces the elimination of
(1, 225-227)
urates by the kidney. Uricosuric therapy may be
desirable in patients at risk of gout (225, 226).

5.17. ANTIFUNGAL AGENTS
INN approved name:
Amphotericin
Flucytosine
Griseofulvin
Nystatin
Terbinafine

Triazole Compounds
Fluconazole
Itraconazole

Imidazole Antifungal Agents
See section on imidazoles

398

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

1. Amphotericin
Combination

Interaction

Antimicrobials/
amphotericin
Acyclovir/amphotericin
(229)

Potentiation of in vitro antiviral activity of acyclovir
has been reported.

Flucytosine/
amphotericin (230)

Mutual potentiation of antifungal action.

Imidazole/amphotericin
(233)

Miconazole and amphotericin are antagonistic in their
antifungal activity.

Norfloxacidamphotericin Antifungal activity may be enhanced by this
combination.
Rifampicidamphotericin
and
Tetracycline/
amphotericin (231, 232)

These combination of rifampicin and/or minocycline
with amphotericin have been reported to have
potentiated action against Aspergillus species.

Cardiac glycosided
amphotericin (173)

Severe hypokalaemia may follow amphotericin
therapy, this potentiates digitalis glycoside toxicity.

Skeletal muscle
relaxants/
amphotericin (173)

The hypokalaemia associated with amphotericin may
enhance the curariform action of skeletal muscle
relaxants.

2. Flucytosine
Combination

Anticoagulants
Nicoumalone and
warfaridflucytosine

Antidiabetic agents/
flucytosine
(sulphonylureas)

Interaction

Flucytosi e increases anticoagula t effects of
nicoumalone and warfarin.
Sulphonylurea’s hypoglycaemia effect potentiated.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

Corn bination

399

Interaction

Anti-epileptics/
flucytosine (173)

Phenytoin metabolism inhibited, increased risk of
toxicity.

Cyclosporinhlucytosine

Metabolism of cyclosporin inhibited; increased risk of
nephrotoxicity .

Rifampicin/flucytosine

Rifampicin increases the rate of metabolism of
fluocytosine and reduces its efficacy.

Theophylline/flucytosine

Metabolism of theophylline inhibited. Increased risk of
toxicity.

3. Griseofulvin
Combination

Znteraction

AlcohoVgriseofulvin

Griseofulvin may impair alcohol metabolism. Avoid
alcohol.

Anticonvulsants/
griseofulvin
(11, 234, 235)

Barbiturates and phenytoin increase the rate of
inactivation of griseofulvin by liver microsomal P450
and reduces its antifungal efficacy.
Phenobarbitone has also been shown to impair the oral
absorption of griseofulvin.

Anticoagulants/
griseofulvin
e.g.
warfarin
nicoumalone
(15, 16, 236)

Griseofulvin increases the rate of metabolism of
coumarin-type anticoagulants.

Bromocriptine/
griseofulvin (237)

The response to bromocriptine was blocked in one
reported case who was concurrently receiving
griseofulvin.

Cyclosporin/griseofulvin
(238)

The hepatic metabolism of cyclosporin is increased by
griseofulvin leading to reduced efficacy of cyclosporin
and risk of organ rejection in transplant patients.

400

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Food/griseofulvin (239)

Griseofulvin absorption is enhanced by fatty foods.

Oral contraceptives/
griseofulvin (240)

The hepatic breakdown of oral contraceptives is
increased by griseofulvin, thus increasing the risk of
unwanted pregnancy.

4. Nystatin
Cornbination

Riboflavine/nystatin

Interaction

The activity of nystatin against Candida albicons was
completely inhibited by riboflavin.

5.18. ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
INN approved name:
Acyclovir
Amantadine hydrochloride
Famciclovir
Foscarnet sodium
Ganciclovir

Inosine pranobex
Pantamidine
Tribavirin
Zidovudine

1. Foscarnet
Foscarnet can produce renal damage, in some cases so serious that the patients
have required dialysis.
Combination

Interaction

Aminoglycosides/foscarnet Renal toxicity of aminoglycosides and amphotericin are
(amphotericin B) (141)
enhanced by foscarnet.
Pentamidine/foscarnet
(141)

Renal impairment and symptomatic hypocalcaemia
(Trousseau and Chvostek’s signs) have been observed
during concomitant foscarnet and i.v. pentamidine.

2. Ganciclovir
The most common side effects of ganciclovir are haematalogical and include neutropoenia, thrombocytopenia. Some degree of neutropenia occurs in 40% of patients
treated. The manufacturer recommends that ganciclovir is not used with the following drugs; dapsone, pentamidine, flucytosine, vincristine, vinblastine, adriamycin,

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

401

amphotericin, trimethoprim, cotrimoxazole, because of the risk of addictive toxicity
(242).
Combination

Interaction

P-lactam antibiotics/
ganciclovir
e.g.
imipen
cilastatin (242)

Ganciclovir when used with combination of imipen and
cilastatin has been reported to result in generalized
seizures.

Probenecidganciclovir
(242)

Probenecid increases the mean half-life and area under
the plasma concentration of systemically administered
acyclovir. Probenecid reduces the renal elimination of
ganciclovir.

3. Zidovudine
Zidovudine should be used with caution with any agent which is potentially nephrotoxic, e.g. pentamidine, dapsone, amphotericin, fluocytosine, ganciclovir, interferon, vincristine, vinblastine, doxorubicin, etc. Experience of drug interaction
potential is limited but the manufacturer warns that phenytoin blood levels should
be monitored since reports are contradictory (244).
Combination

Ganciclovir/zidovudine
(243)

Interaction

Unacceptable bone marrow toxicity occurred when
zidovudine was added to ganciclovir in six of seven
patients with AIDS - who had cytomegalovirus
retinitis.

Recommended further reading
Baciewicz AM, Self TH, Bekemeyer WB. (1987) Update on Rifampicin drug interactions.
Arch Intern Med 147, 565.
Barclay ML, Begg EJ. (1994) Aminoglycoside toxicity and relation to dose regimen. Adverse
Drug React Toxicol Rev 13, 207.
Begg EJ, Barclay ML. (1995) Aminoglycosides - 50 years on. Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 597.
Cribb AE, Lee BE, Trepanier LA, Speilberg SP. (1996) Adverse reactions to sulphonamide
and sulphonamide-trimethoprim antimicrobials, clinical syndromes and pathogenesis. A d verse Drug React Toxicol Rev 15, 9.
Duffnell SB, Begg EJ. (1994) Vancomycin toxicity: what is the evidence for dose dependency?
Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 13, 103.
Griffin JP. (1992) A review of the literature on Benign intracranial hypertension associated
with medication. Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 11, 41.

402

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

REFERENCES

1 British National Formulary. (March 1996) No 31, Appendix 1, p. 541.
2 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
266-267 (sodium clodronate) ,
3 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
364-365 (disodiumpamudronate).
4 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1346-1347 (disodium etidronate).
5 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1429-1430 (gentamicin).
6 Johnson AH, Hamilton CH. (1970) South Med J 63, 511.
7 Mathog RH, Klein WJ Jr. (1969) N Engl J Med 280, 1223.
8 Schwartz G H et al. (1970) N Engl J Med 282, 1413.
9 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
308-310 (arnikacin).
10 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1571- 1572 (kanamycin).
11 Hussar DA. (1967) Am J Pharm 139, 215.
12 McIver AK. (1967) Pharm J 199, 205.
13 Cheng SH, White A. (1962) N Engl J Med 267, 1296.
14 Chang T , Weinstein L. (1966) Nature, Lond 211, 763.
15 Udall JA. (1970) Clin Med 77, 20.
16 Koch-Weser J, Sellers EM. (1971) N Engl J Med 285, 487, 547.
17 Kippel AP, Pitsinger B. (1968) Arch Surg 96, 266.
18 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
294-295 (neomycin).
19 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
878-880 (tobramycin).
20 Schou J. (1986) In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP (Eds) Iatrogenic Diseases, 3rd edn, Oxford,
Oxford University Press, pp. 527-552.
21 Polhmann G. (1966) JAMA 196, 181.
22 Parisi AF, Kaplan MH. (1965) JAMA 194, 298.
23 Levene RA et al. (1969) J Mount Sinai Hosp 36, 380.
24 Pittinger CB et al. (1970) Anaesth Analg Curr Res 49, 487.
25 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1140 (pancuronium).
26 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1944 (mivacurium).
27 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
556 (tubocurarine).
28 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1966 (atracurium).
29 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1381 (gallamine).
30 Ebert SC, Clementi WA. (1982) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 17, 457.
31 Tindula RJ. (1983) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 17, 906.
32 Nilsson L et al. (1981) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 20, 155.
33 O’Connell MB et al. (1984) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 18, 503.
34 Regamey C et al. (1972) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1, 329.
35 Reynolds JEF. (1992) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th edn, Pharmaceutical
Press, London, pp. 129, 140, 178.
36 Portier H et al. (1980) Lancet ii, 263.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

403

37 Drummer S et al. (1980) New Engl J Med 303, 1417.
38 Koch-Weser J et al. (1970) Ann Intern Med 72, 857.
39 Council of Drugs. (1968) JAMA 206, 1289.
40 Tuano SB et al. (1967) Antimicrob Agents Chemother (1966) pp. 101-106.
41 Christensen LK, Skovsted L. (1969) Lancet ii, 1397.
42 Petitpierre B, Fabre J. (1970) Lancet i, 789.
43 Bloxham RA et al. (1979) Arch Dis Child 54, 76.
44 Kranski K et al. (1982) Pediatr Infect Dis 1, 232.
45 Farber BF, Brody JP. (1981) South Med J 74, 1257.
46 West BC et al. (1988) Rev Infect Dis 10, 1048.
47 Faber OK. (1975) Br J Clin Pharmacol2, 281.
48 Reynolds JEF. (1992) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th edn, Pharmaceutical
Press, London, p. 1176.
49 Prescott LF. (1996) Paracetamol: A Critical Bibliographic Review, Taylor Francies,
London, pp. 387-400.
50 Buchanan N, Moodley GP. (1979) Br Med J 2, 308.
51 Rajpurohit R, Krishnaswamy K. (1984) Znd J Pharmacol 16, 124.
52 Kearns GL et al. (1985) J Pediatrics 107, 134.
53 Spika JS et al. (1986) Arch Dis Childhood 61, 1121.
54 Spika JS, Aranda JV. (1987) Arch Dis Childhood 62, 1087.
55 Bravo ME et al. (1987) Rev Chilena Pediatr 58, 117.
56 Stein CM et al. (1989) Br J Clin Pharmacol27, 262.
57 Jawet E et al. (1950) Science 111, 254.
58 Lepper MH, Dowling HF. (1951) Arch Intern Med 88, 489.
59 Jawetz E, Gunnison J. (1952) Chemotherapia (Basel) 2 , 243.
60 Garrod LP, Waterworth PM. (1962) J Clin Path 15, 328.
61 Mansten A, Terra JI. (1964) Chemotherapia (Basel) 8, 21.
62 Garrod LP. (1973) Br Med J 1, 110.
63 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1864-1865 (clindomycin).
64 Lane RJM, Routledge PA. (1983) Drugs 26, 124.
65 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
889-892 (Vancomycin).
66. Endocarditis Working Party of the British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy.
(1990) Lancet 335, 88.
67 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1377-1381 (metronidazole).
68 Magnasco AJ, Magnasco LD. (1986) Clin Pharm 5 , 522.
69 Teicher MH et al. (1987) JAMA 257, 3365.
70 Daneshmend TK. (1982) Lancet ii, 1342.
71 Dieperink H, Moller J. (1982) Lancet ii, 1217.
72 Ferguson RM et al. (1982) Lancet ii, 882.
73 Morgenstern GR et al. (1982) Lancet ii, 1342.
74 Ferguson RM, Fidelu-Gort R. (1983) Transplant Proc 15, 2350.
75 Smith J et al. (1983) Exp Hematol 11 (Suppl 13), 176.
76 White DJ et al. (1984) Transplantation 37, 214.
77 Burke MD, Whiting PH. (1986) Clin Nephrol 25 (Suppl l),S111.
78 Shepard JH, Simmons RL. (1986) Clin Pharrn 5 , 468.
79 Bardakji Z et al. (1986) Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 18, 140.
80 Rothstein E, Clancy DD. (1969) N Engl J Med 280, 1006.
81 Thomas M et al. (1996) Br J Clin Pharmacol41, 77-81.
82 Thomas SHL. (1994) Adverse Drug React Toxic01Rev 13, 77.
83 Gugler R, Jensen JC. (1983) N Engl J Med 309, 1518.

404

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

84 Ahonen J et al. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol40, 270.
85 Doble N et al. (1988) J Antimicrob Chemother 21, 633.
86 Abadie-Kemmerly S et al. (1989) Ann Intern Med 109, 844.
87 Engelhard D et al. (1984) N Eng J Med 311, 1681.
88 Pessayre D et al. (1985) J Antimicrob Chemother 16 (Suppl A), 181.
89 Bartkowski RR et al. (1989) Clin Pharmacol Ther 46, 99.
90 Ragosta M et al. (1989) Amer J Med 86, 465.
91 Weibert RT et al. (1989) Clin Pharm 8 , 210.
92 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
731 (astemizole).
93 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
960 (terfenadine).
94 Dravet C et al. (1977) Lancet i , 8.
95 Mesdjian E et al. (1980) Epilepsia 21, 489.
96 Wong YYet al. (1983) Clin Pharmacol Ther 33, 460.
97 Hedrick R et al. (1983) Ther Drug Monit 5 , 405.
98 Mitsch RA. (1989) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 23, 878.
99 Doherty JE. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 287.
100 Lindbaum J et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 789.
101 Maxwell DL et al. (1989) Br Med J 298, 572.
102 Morton MR, Cooper JW. (1989) DICP Ann Pharmacol Ther 23, 668.
103 Ptachcinski RJ et al. (1985) N Engl J Med 313, 1416.
104 Martell R et al. (1986) A n n Intern Med 104, 660.
105 Wadhwa NK et al. (1987) Ther Drug Monitor 9, 123.
106 Gupta SK et al. (1989) Br J Clin Pharmacol27, 475.
107 Ignoffo RJ, Kim LE. (1991) DICP A n n Pharmacof Ther 25, 30.
108 Lagier G et al. (1979) Therapie 34, 515.
109 Matthews NT, Havill Jh. (1979) N Z Med J 89, 476.
110 Nelson MV et al. (1990) Clin Pharmacol Ther 47, 166.
111 Renton KW et al. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 30, 422.
112 Paulsen 0 et al. (1987) Eur J Clin Pharmacol32, 493.
113 Weinberger M et al. (1977) J Allergy Clin Immunol59, 228.
114 Brazier JL et al. (1980) Therapie 35, 545.
115 Ruff F et al. (1981) Nouv Press Med 10, 175.
116 Heipertz R, Pilz H. (1978) J NeuroZ218, 297.
117 D’Arcy PF. (1986) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 20, 353.
118 Reynolds JEF. (1992) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th edn, Pharmaceutical
Press, London, p. 184.
119 Jick H , Porter JB. (1981) J Clin Pharmacol21, 456.
120 Hoigne R et al. (1987) N Engl J Med 316, 1217.
121 McLaughlin JE, Reeves DS. (1972) Lancet i , 261.
122 Riff LJ, Jackson GG. (1972) Arch Intern Med 130, 887.
123 Brown M et al. (1979) Can J Hosp Pharm 32, 18.
124 Cheng SH, White A. (1962) N Engl J Med 267, 1296.
125 Kazmier FJ. (1976) Mayo Clin Proc 51, 782; O’Reilly RA. (1976) N Engl J Med 295,
354.
126 Ali HM. (1985) J Antimicrob Chemother 15, 781.
127 Kampf D et al. (1984) Clin Pharm Ther 35, 214.
128 Wroe SJ et al. (1987) Med Toxic012, 233.
129 Orme MJ. (1972) Medicine 4 , 302.
130 Parisi AF, Kaplan MH. (1965) J A M A 194, 298.
131 Polhmann G. (1966) J A M A 196, 181.
132 Levene R A et aZ. (1969) J Mount Sinai Hosp 36, 380.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

405

133 Pittinger CB et al. (1970) Anaesth Analg Curr Res 49, 487.
134 Committee on Safety of Medicines. (1991) Curr Problems 32.
135 Janknegt R. (1990) J Antimicrob Chemother 26 (Suppl D), 7.
136 Christ W. (1990) J Antimicrob Chemother 26 (Suppl B), 219.
137 Campbell NRC et al. (1992) Br J Clin Pharmacol 33, 115.
138 Shinada J et al. (1992) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 36, 1219.
139 Parpia SH et al. (1989) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 33, 99.
140 Sorgel F et al. (1988) Rev Infect Dis 10 (Suppl l), S137.
141 Grasela TH et al. (1989) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 33, 615.
142 Matt FE et al. (1989) A n n Intern Med 111, 542.
143 Kamada AK. (1990) DICP A n n Pharmacol Ther 24, 27.
144 Hoffbrand BI. (1974) Br Med J 2, 666.
145 Leor J et al. (1987) A n n Intern Med 107, 601.
146 Potasman I , Bassan H. (1980) A n n Intern Med 109, 761.
147 Leor J, Matetzki S. (1988) A n n Intern Med 109, 761.
148 Toon S et al. (1987) Clin Pharmacol Ther 42, 33.
149 Akerele JO, Okhamafe AO. (1991) J Antrirnicrob Chemother 28, 87.
150 Kivisto KT et al. (1992) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 36, 489.
151 Neuvonen PJ, Kivisto KT. (1992) Br J Clin Pharmacol33, 346.
152 Westwood GPC, Hooper WL. (1975) Lancet i, 460.
153 Alderhold RM, Muniz CE. (1970) J A M A 213, 2080.
154 Barriere SL et al. (1990) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 34, 823.
155 Grasela TH, Dreis MW. (1992) Arch Intern Med 152, 617.
156 Robson RA. (1992) Am J Med 92 (Suppl4A), 22s.
157 Niki K et al. (1987) Chest 92, 663.
158 Wijnando WJA et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol 22, 677.
159 Robson R A et al. (1990) Br J Clin Pharmacol29, 491.
160 Loi CM et al. (1993) Br J Clin Pharmacol36, 195.
161 Batty KT et al. (1996) Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 305.
162 Csogor SI, Kerek SF. (1970) Br J Anaesth 42, 988.
163 Anton AH. (1968) Clin Pharmacol Ther 9 , 561.
164 Christensen LK et al. (1963) Lancet ii, 1298.
165 Bergman H. (1965) Acta Med Scand 177, 287.
166 Soeldner JA, Steinke J. (1965) J A M A 193, 398.
167 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1183-1186 (phenytoin).
168 Siersbaek-Nielsen K et al. (1973) Clin Pharmacol Ther 14, 148.
169 Gillman MA, Sandyk R. (1985) A n n Intern Med 102, 559.
170 Jones DK et al. (1986) Br Med J 292, 728.
171 Wallwork J et al. (1983) Lancet i, 366.
172 Dixon RL et al. (1965) Fed Proc 24, 454.
173 Azarnoff DL, Hurwitz A. (1970) Pharmacol Phys 4 , 1.
174 Hartshorn EA. (1969) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 3 , 311.
175 Prescott LF. (1969) Lancet ii, 1239.
176 Levy G . (1970) In: Prescription Pharmacy, 2nd edn, Philadelphia,Lippincott, pp. 70,
75, 80.
177 Neuvonen PJ et al. (1974) Br Med J 4 , 532.
178 Searcy RL et al. (1965) Antimicrob Agents Chemother (1964) pp. 179-183.
179 Neuvonen PJ, Penttila 0. (1974) Br Med J 1 , 535.
180 Pentilla 0 et al. (1974) Br Med J 2, 470.
181 Cole JJ et al. (1980) Lancet ii, 536.
182 Garty M, Hurwitz H . (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacol 10, 408.
183 Fisher P et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol9, 153.

406

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

184 Tashima CK. (1971) Br Med J 4, 557.
185 Aro A et al. (1978) Lancet i, 673.
186 Blumenthal SA, Streeten DHP. (1976) Ann Intern Med 84, 55.
187 Lindenbaum J et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 789.
188 Doherty JE. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 826.
189 McGennis AJ. (1978) Br Med J 1, 1183.
190 Garrod LP. (1973) Br Med J 1, 110.
191 Griffin JP. (1992) Adverse Drug React Toxic01 Rev 11, 41.
192 Jain KK. (0000) Drug Induced Neurological Disorders, Hogrefe and Huber, Seattle,
USA, Ch 17, pp. 299 et seq.
193 Reynolds JEF (Ed). (1992) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th edn, Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 219.
194 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1748 (trimethoprim).
195 Wanwimolruk S et al. (1996) Br J Clin Pharmacol40, 87.
196 Tusum-Barima Y et al. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 1466.
197 Robson RA et al. (1984) Br J Clin Pharmacol 18, 445.
198 Hebert MF et al. (1992) Clin Pharmacol Ther 52, 453.
199 Baciewicz AM. (1987) Arch Intern Med 147, 565.
200 Reimers D. (1974) J A M A 227, 608.
201 Edwards OM et al. (1974) Lancet ii, 544.
202 Buffington GA et al. (1976) J A M A 236, 1958.
203 Edwards OM, Courtnay-Evans RJ. (1974) Lancet ii, 549.
204 Yamada S, Ivai K. (1976) Lancet ii, 366.
205 Novi C et al. (1980) J A M A 244, 2521.
206 Peters U et al. (1974) Dtsch Med Wochenschr 99, 2381.
207 Boman G et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol 10, 89.
208 Bennett PN et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 13, 387.
209 Kreek MJ et al. (1976) N Engl J Med 294, 1104.
210 Smith CK, Durack. (1978) Ann Intern Med 88, 520.
211 Hauser MJ, Baier H. (1982) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 16, 617.
212 Uragoda CG. (1978) J Trop Med Hyg 81, 243.
213 Uragoda CG, Kottegoda SR. (1977) Tubercule 58, 83.
214 Uragoda CG. (1980) Am Rev Resp Dis 12, 157.
215 Uragoda CG, Lodha SC. (1979) Tubercule 60, 59.
216 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
477 (capreomycin).
217 Murray FJ. (1962) Am Rev Respir Drs 86, 729.
218 Kutt H et al. (1970) Am Rev Respir Dis 101, 377.
219 Kutt H et al. (1966) Neurology 16, 594.
220 Brennan RW et al. (1970) Neurology 20, 687.
221 Thompson JR et al. (1982) Curr Ther Res 32, 921.
222 Mattila MJ et al. (1969) Scand J Respir Dis 50, 291.
223 Glass F et al. (1965) Arzneim forsch 15, 684.
224 Mattila MJ et al. (1978) Br J Clin Pharmacol5, 161.
225 Ellard GA, Haslam RM. (1976) Tubercule 57, 97.
226 Jenner PJ et al. (1981) Tubercule 62, 175.
227 Yu TF et al. (1977) Am J Med 63, 723.
228 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
857 (cycloserine).
229 Malewiez B et al. (1984) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 25, 772.
230 Beggs WH. (1986) J Antimicrob Chemother 17, 402.
231 Hughes CE et al. (1984) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 25, 560.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

407

232 Hughes CE et al. (1984) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 26, 837.
233 Schocter LP et al. (1976) Lancet ii, 318.
234 Busfield D et al. (1963) Lancet ii, 1042.
235 Riegelman S et al. (1970) JAMA 213, 426.
236 Cullen SI, Catalan0 PM. (1967) JAMA 199, 582.
237 Schwinn G et al. (1971) Eur J Clin Invest 7 , 101.
238 Abu-Romeh SH et al. (1991) Nephron 58, 237.
239 Crounse RG. (1961) J Invest Dermatol37, 529.
240 British National Formulary (1996) No 31, Family Planning Association advice relating
to short-term course of an enzyme inducing drug, p. 334 and Appendix 1.
241 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
130 (foscarnet).
242 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1820- 1822.
243 Millar AB et al. (1990) Genitourin Med 66, 156.
244 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium, (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1956-1959.
245 El-Nakeeb MA. (1976) Can J Pharm Sci 11, 85.
246 Committee on Safety of Medicines. (1996) Curr Problems Pharmacovigilance 22, 1.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 6
Drug Interactions with Agents Used
to Treat Endocrine Disorders

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

6.1 DRUGS USED IN DIABETES
CLASSIFICATION OF ORAL ANTIDIABETIC AGENTS
Aldose
reductase
inhibitors
Alrestatin
Epalrestat
Ponalrestat

a-Glucosidase
inhibitors

Biguanides

Sulphonylureas

Acarbose
Emiglitate
Miglitol

Buformin
Metformin
Phenformin

Acetohexamide
Carbutamide
Chlorpropamide
Glibenclamide
Glibornuride
Gliclazide
Glimepiride
Glipizide

Others

Gliquidone
Glybuzole
Glisetide
Glymidine
Glisolamide
Guar Gum
Glisoxepide
Glyclopyramide
Glycyclamide
Tolazamide
Tolbutamide

Source: Reynolds (1).

CLASSIFICATION OF INSULINS
Insulin preparations marketed by British insulin manufacturrs under British Pharmacopoeia titles are listed in the following table which is reproduced with the kind
permission of the Editor and Publishers of MIMS (Monthly Index of Medical
Specialities).

INTERACTIONS WITH SULPHONYLUREAS (based on Reynolds (1))
Many compounds have been reported to interact with sulphonylureas. Most are due
to either displacement of the sulphonylurea from plasma proteins or to alterations in
their metabolism or excretion (2). Many of the reports involve the older sulphonylureas such as chlorpropamide or tolbutamide. Reports may be categorized into two
classes:
(i) interactions which may diminish the hypoglycaemic effect; and
(ii) interactions which may increase the hypoglycaemic effect.
(i) Compounds that may diminish the hypoglycaemic effect and thus necessitate an
increase in the dosage requirements of sulphonylureas include: rifampicin (3) and
the thiazide diuretics (4). There is also a theoretical risk of of a diminished hypoglycaemic effect with adrenaline, aminoglutethimide, chlorpromazine, corticosteroids,
cyclophosphamide, diazoxide, gemfibrozil, isoniazid, oestrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin and thyroid hormones.

411

412

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

DRUGS USED IN DIABETES

413

(ii) Compounds that may increase the hypoglycaemic effect of sulphonylureas and
necessitate a reduction in their dosage include: anti-infective agents such as chloramphenicol ( 5 ) , fluconazole (6), ketoconazole (7) miconazole (S), sulphonamides (9)
including co-trimoxazole (10, 11); some anti-inflammatory agents and analgesics,
including azapropazone (12), indobufen (13), phenylbutazone (14), and salicylates
(15); also coumarin anticoagulants (16) and heparin (17); lipid-regulating agents
such as clofibrate (18), halfenate (19) and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (20). Other
compounds that may be implicated in such interactions include: captopril (21, 22),
cimetidine (23), doxepin (24), enalapril (22, 25), fenfluramine (26), methyldopa
(27), nortriptyline (24), probenecid, ranitidine (28) and sulphinpyrazone (29). There
is also a theoretical risk of increased hypoglycaemic effects with anabolic steroids,
cyclophosphamide, isoniazid, mebendazole, octreotide, and tetracyclines. P-Blockers may mask some of the sympathetic warning signs of hypoglycaemia, they may
have hypoglycaemic or hyperglycaemic actions of their own (30) and there have
been reports that they reduce the hypoglycaemic action of glibenclamide (31).
Reports of the effect of calcium-channel blockers on glucose tolerance are conflicting; any overall effect is probably marginal (30). Reports of the more important of
these individual interactions are described below. Most of these refer to the older
sulphonylureas, chlorpropamide or tolbutamide, but the possibility of similar interaction with more recently developed antidiabetic agents should be borne in mind.
A review of 1418 cases of drug-induced hypoglycaemia reported since 1940 has
shown that the sulphonylureas (especially chlorpropamide and glibenclamide),
either alone or with a second hypoglycaemic or potentiating agent, account for 63%
of all cases (32).

INTERACTIONS WITH INSULIN (based on Reynolds (1))
The lists of drugs that have an effect on blood glucose concentrations and may alter
the insulin requirements are similar to those which affect the sulphonylureas and
other antidiabetic agents.
(i) Those drugs with hypoglycaemic activity which may decrease insulin requirements are: anabolic steroids, aspirin, fenfluramine, monoamine oxidase inhibitors
and octreotide. There have also been isolated reports of decreased insulin requirements with captopril(35), clofibrate, enalapril(36), guanethidine (37), mebendazole
(38) and oxytetracycline (39). Gemfibrozil, as with the clofibrate group, may improve glucose tolerance and have additive effects if given with antidiabetic agents
(41) *
(ii) Increased requirements of insulin may occur with: adrenaline, chlorpromazine,
oral contraceptives, thiazide diuretics and thyroid hormones. There have been
isolated reports of increased insulin requirements or aggravation of hyperglycaemia
with chlordiazepoxide (40), diltiazem (41) and dobutamine (42).
The following drugs may increase or decrease insulin requirements: alcohol, P-

414

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

blockers, cyclophosphamide (42, 43) and isoniazid (44). @-Blockersmay also mask
some of the prodromal adrenergic signs of insulin-induced hypoglycaemia.
Details of some of these interactions are summarized in the following Table of
Drug Interactions.
Combination

Interaction

Antidiabetic agent/
acarbose

Acarbose is an inhibitor of a-glucosidase and retards
the absorption and digestion of of carbohydrates in the
small intestine, and hence, reduces the increase in
blood glucose concentrations after a carbohydrate
load. It may potentiate the effects of other
hypoglycaemic agents, including insulin, and may
necessitate a reduction in their dosage. Concomitant
administration of gastrointestinal adsorbents and
digestive enzyme preparations may diminish the effects
of acarbose and should be avoided. Neomycin and
cholestyramine may enhance the effects of acarbose
and a reduction in its dosage may be required
(45-49) *

Antidiabetic agent/
alcohol

Large intakes of alcohol may cause severe
hypoglycaemia (50-52). In general diabetic patients do
not need to abstain from alcohol but they should not
exceed 3 units/day (males) or 2 units/day (woman)
(53). However, patients need to take account of the
calorific value of alcohol, including any sugarcontaining mixes in the management of their diet (54).

Biguanides

In patients on metformin, binge-drinking increases the
risk of lactic aidosis by potentiating the effects of
metformin on lactate metabolism (55-57).

Sulphonylureas

In alcoholics there is induction of hepatic microsomal
enzymes and a reduced half-life of, for example,
chlorpropamide and tolbutamide (58, 59). In heavy
drinkers (30 unitdday) blood levels of tolbutamide are
roughly halved (58). Blood clearance of tolbutamide in
those who drink only a few times per week, or in exdrinkers with advanced, but well compensated cirrhosis
of the liver is not normally affected (60). Most patients
with diabetes need not abstain from alcohol (54).
Chlorpropamide facial flush (CPAF) has been

DRUGS USED IN DIABETES

Combination

415

Interaction

suggested as a marker for a special type of non-insulindependent diabetes and may be akin to metencephalininduced flush. A central prostaglandin-dependent step
in CPAF is proposed and blockade by aspirin is
thought to be due to interference with prostaglandin
synthesis (52, 61-70). Facial flushing occurred in two
of 43 insulin diabetics treated with tolbutamide (71).
Antidiabetic agent/
anabolic steroid

Insulin requirements may be reduced; the
hypoglycaemic response to tolbutamide may be
enhanced (72). This combination should be avoided, it
is doubtful if there is any useful role for anabolic
steroids in diabetic patients.

Antidiabetic agent/
antimicrobial agent
Chloramphenicol

Chloramphenicol (2 g/day for 10 days) has been shown
to increase the half-life of tolbutamide three-fold.
Similarly chloramphenicol (1.5-3 g/day) increased the
half-life of chlorpropamide to 40-146 hr compared
with the normal figures of 30-36 hr (50, 51).
A 69-year-old diabetic woman taking chlorpropamide
500 m g/day) was hospitalized with hypoglycaemia and
associated neurological symptoms 2 days after starting
co-trimoxazole (two tablets, twice daily). It was
thought that the sulphamethoxazole component of the
co-trimoxazole either displaced chlorpropamide from
its protein binding sites or competed for renal
excretion (73, 74). A similar case has been reported in
which glipizide and co-trimoxazole drastically lowered
blood glucose levels to 2.2 mmoYl in a hospitalized
patient; this hypoglycaemia was accompanied by a
severely changed mental status requiring stoppage of
glipizide. The patient retained glycaemic control when
the course of co-trimoxazole ceased (74).
Antibacterials other than sulphonamides are preferred
in patients on chlorpropamide or any other
sulphonylurea, but if they are essential then a possible
reduction of the dose of the antidiabetic drug and
careful monitoring of glycaemic control may be an
alternative,

Co-trimoxazole

Isoniazid

Glycosuria and hyperglycaemia have been reported
with a sulphonyluredisoniazid combination. Two cases

416

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Isoniazid cont.

of irreversible diabetes caused by isoniazid have been
reported (75). Choice of an alternative tuberculostatic
drug is recommended.

Tetracycline

Phenformin-induced lactic acidosis has been reported
to be precipitated by tetracyclines (76, 77). The
mechanism of this interaction is unknown but it is
more likely to occur if there is concomitant renal
impairment, Phenformin has been withdrawn from
clinical use in the UK and many other countries due to
its association with lactic acidosis.

Antidiabetic agent/
anticoagulant coumarins

Dicoumarol and other coumarin anticoagulants may
increase the half-life of tolbutamide in both diabetics
(16, 78) and normal subjects (79). A similar effect has
been described with chlorpropamide (80). There have
been a few early instances of tolbutamide enhancing
the activity of dicoumarol (81). This effect has not
been reported in later studies involving dicoumarol
(81-83), warfarin (82) and phenprocoumon (84),
although one study did demonstrate altered dicoumarol
pharmacokinetics (83).
An absence of effect has been documented for
phenprocoumon and insulin, glibencamide or
glibornuride (84). Metformin has been reported to
diminish the activity of phenprocoumon (85). A
woman maintained on warfarin for over 30 years was
started on glibencamide (10 mg daily). Forty-eight
hours later she reported bruising around the left
shoulder and upper arm which later spread to the soft
tissue of her chest wall tracking down towards the
abdomen. Her internationalized normalized ratio was
6.6 (it was 2.3 before glibenclamide). Warfarin was
stopped and she was given fresh plasma. Despite
futher transfusions her coagulation remained abnormal
(INR 5.2). Glibenclamide was stopped and within 24
hr her INR returned to normal (2.2) (86). Although
interactions between sulphonylureas and warfarin have
been recognized since 1970, these applied largely to
chlorpropamide. All combinations of a sulphonylurea
and anticoagulant should be used with extreme

DRUGS USED IN DIABETES

Combination

417

Interaction

caution; a reduction in the dose of the sulphonylurea
should be anticipated.
Heparin

A 64-year-old diabetic stabilized on glipizide was given
a heparin intravenous infusion. He suffered recurring
hypoglycaemic attacks over 4 days. Sulphonylureas are
highly bound to protein, and even small doses of
heparin indirectly decrease the binding of drugs by
increasing free fatty acid concentrations - an effect
more pronounced in diabetics than others (73, 87).
Anticipate this interaction and avoid this combination
if possible.

Antidiabetic agent/
antidepressant (MAOIs)

MA01 antidepressants enhance or prolong the
hypoglycaemic responses to both insulin and the
sulphonylureas. It is not known whether other classes
of antidiabetic drugs (e.g. metformin and glymidine)
are similarly affected, although this is a possibility
since it is thought that MAOIs interfere with the
compensatory adrenergic response to hypoglycaemia
releasing glucose from liver glycogen (88). The normal
adrenergic response to hypoglycaemia (sweating and
shaking) is not affected (89). This combination should
be avoided.

Antidiabetic agent/
anti-fungal
ketoconazole
fluconazole

Clearance of tolbutamide was significantly decreased
by concomitant administration of ketoconazole
resulting in mild hypoglycaemia in five of seven
healthy subjects (90). Diabetics stabilized on
tolbutamide should be monitored for altered glycaemic
response if ketoconazole is initiated or discontinued.
Fluconazole has also been noted to increase the AUC
of tolbutamide (91). The effects of other antifungal
agents on tolbutamide are unknown.

Antidiabetic agent/
anti-hypertensive

Hypertension, congestive heart failure and myocardial
infarction are common problems among diabetics.
Many of these disorders necessitate drug treatment of
long duration. A complicating factor in such
treatments is the adverse effect on glucose metabolism
of many drugs including thiazide diuretics and pblocking agents.

418

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

ACE inhibitors

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are
now the usual treatment for cardiovascular disorders of
diabetics since they are effective and have few adverse
effects. There have, however, been several reports of
hypoglycaemia associated with their use (21, 22, 33,
92). Most cases have been in non-insulin-dependent
diabetics treated with captopril or enalapril. Several
clinical studies with small and selected groups of
patients have been done, but they have not resolved
the question of whether ACE inhibitors precipitate
hypoglycaemia (93-96). More recent evidence has
suggested that hypoglycaemia was significantly
associated with the use of ACE inhibitors (odds ratio
2.8), and that this use was significantly associated with
an increased risk of hospital admission for
hypoglycaemia both among users of insulin (odds ratio
2.8) and oral antidiabetic drugs (odds ratio 4.1). A
significantly increased risk of hypoglycaemia was
observed with the use of captopril (97) and the authors
thought that this risk of hypoglycaemia should be
taken into account when treating diabetics. A further
recent paper showed that enalapril given over 4 weeks
improved insulin sensitivity by increasing glucose
storage in hypertensive patients with non-insulindependent diabetes (98).
The bulk of evidence supports the view that an ACE
inhibitor is the primary antihypertensive agent of
choice for diabetic patients.

Diazoxide

Diazoxide was the outcome of research to separate the
antihypertensive and diuretic actions of the thiazides.
Diazoxide has retained all the hyperglycaemic actions
of the thiazides. It inhibits insulin secretion in response
to glucose load. In one series, half the number of
hypertensive patients treated with diazoxide developed
glycosuria (99).

p-blocker

P-blockers may mask some of the prodromal signs of
hypoglycaemia mediated by adrenergic mechanisms,
notably shaking and sweating, by which diabetics and
their relatives recognize the onset of a hypoglycaemic
attack (89). They have been associated with both

DRUGS USED IN DIABETES

Combination

419

Interaction

hyperglycaemia (100, 101) and diabetes mellitus (102)
and also hypoglycaemia (30, 32).
Other effects include inhibition of endogenous insulin
secretory response to glucose or sulphonylurea and
impaired peripheral circulation (see review (103).
Metoprolol

Cardioselective /3-blockade with metoprolol reduced
blood pressure satisfactorily in a group of insulindependent diabetics without influencing glycaemic
control or recognition of hypoglycaemia (104). Other
studies in type 2 diabetics have confirmed that the use
of a selective P-blocker (acebutol) has advantage over
a non-selective agent (propranolol) (105).

Propranolol

Propranolol precipitation of hypoglycaemia in insulindependent diabetics was first noted in the 1960s. In a
review of drug-induced hypoglycaemia, 49 cases of
severe hypoglycaemia were identified with nonselective P-blockers (32). The optimal /3-blocker for
use in type 2 diabetic patients appears to be a PIcardioselective agent with little or no lipophilicity (30).
The most likely mechanism involved in this interaction
is blockade of glucose release from liver glycogen
stores.

Clonidine

The effects of clonidine on carbohydrate metabolism
are variable. Studies show that it does not affect
carbohydrate metabolism in diabetics (106) or nondiabetic hypertensive patients (107). However,
clonidine was associated with elevated fasting blood
sugar levels in one patient (108), while another study
in 10 diabetic hypertensive patients showed that
clonidine impaired the response to an acute glucose
load but did not significantly affect diabetics over a 10week period (109), Severe postural hypotension (110)
and paradoxical hypertension (111) have been reported
following clonidine administration to diabetics with
autonomic neuropathy.

Ca+ channel blocker
nifedipine

There is growing evidence that the calcium channel
blocker, nifedipine, may interfere with the glycaemic
control of diabetic patients being treated with insulin
or oral hypoglycaemic agents. Nifedipine 600 mg daily

420

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Ca+ channel blocker
nifedipine cont.

caused glucose intolerance in normal subjects and
delayed the insulin response to oral glucose in noninsulin-dependent diabetics (112). Another study
showed impairment of glucose tolerance in non-insulindependent diabetics after receiving nifedipine 30 mg
daily for 10 days (113). Other reports on interference.
with glycaemic control have been made in several
studies (114-120), nifedipine has been associated with
most of these reports, although diltiazem and
verapamil have been implicated as well (117, 120). In
contrast, other groups found no change in glucose
tolerance in diabetics and non-diabetic subjects who
took nifedipine 20-40 mg daily (122-132).
The possible mechanism of this interaction allows
much speculation. It has been suggested (120) that a
change in intracellular calcium may lead to an
alteration in insulin secretion or to an increased
peripheral insulin resistance. The latter may result
from counter regulatory secretion (glucagon,
catecholamines, glucocorticoids or growth hormone) or
from altered enzymatic reactions that modify glucose
production and use.
The validity of this interaction is uncertain and until
more evidence is available it would be prudent for all
diabetic patients receiving antihypertensive treatment
with nifedipine or other calcium channel blocker to be
regularly monitored for continuation of good glycaemic
control. If glycaemic control is impaired then
alternative antihypertensive therapy should be
considered.

Antidiabetic agent/
aspirin and salicylates

In vitro studies have shown that aspirin and salicylates
displace tolbutamide and chlorpropamide from plasma
binding thus increasing unbound active sulphonylurea
(133). Overdosage with salicylates can produce
hypoglycaemia in children. Although it is recognized
that therapeutic doses of salicylates in adults can lower
blood glucose concentrations in diabetic and nondiabetic subjects alike, opinion on the clinical
significance of this effect varies (32, 134). Salicylates
have been implicated in a few cases of hypoglycaemia

DRUGS USED IN DIABETES

Combination

421

Interaction

in adults (15, 32) and some of these suggest that
patients with renal failure or those receiving high doses
in rheumatoid arthritis may be at risk (134).
Hypoglycaemia has been reported in one patient with
renal failure following excessive application of a topical
preparation containing salicylic acid (135).
The insulin requirement of diabetics can be reduced by
aspirin; in one series of 14 patients, salicylate plasma
levels of 34-45 mg/100 ml reduced the daily insulin zinc
suspension requirements by up to 48 units (136). Cases
have also been reported where aspirin has contributed
to profound hypoglycaemia in patients on
sulphonylureas (137, 138). However, interactions with
aspirin and salicylates seem to be rare and only occur
with high and continuous dosage. Normal dosage of
aspirin is unlikely to have any appreciable effect on
glycaemic control of diabetics.
Non-steroidal antiinflammatory agents

Some non-steroidal anti-inflamatory agents, including
azapropazone (12), fenclofenac (139), indobufen (13),
and phenylbutazone (140-142), will increase the
hypoglycaemic effect of sulphonylureas. Glycaemic
control may be difficult and should be monitored.
Severe hypoglycaemic episodes have been reported
(12, 141, 142). A reduction in dosage of the NSAID
may be necessary. Most of these interactions are due
either to displacement of the sulphonylurea from
plasma protein binding or to alterations in the
metabolism and excretion of the sulphonylurea (2).

Antidiabetic agent/
cimetidine metformin

Cimetidine administration resulted in increased plasma
metformin concentrations in seven healthy subjects.
The renal clearance of metformin was reduced due to
competition for proximal tubular secretion. A
reduction in metformin dosage may be required in
patients taking this combination to avoid the risk of
lactic acidosis (143).

Antidiabetic agent/
clofibrate

The interaction is complex since clofibrate has been
shown to alter glucose tolerance in both diabetic and
non-diabetic patients. Clofibrate (2 glday) caused
hypoglycaemia in four of 13 diabetic patients treated

422

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antidiabetic agent/
clofibrate cont.

with various sulphonylureas. The patients who
demonstrated this effect had abnormally low plasma
albumin levels; it is possible that this interaction took
place at plasma binding levels (144).
This combination should be avoided unless the patient
is monitored during the first week of taking the
combination. The dosage of the antidiabetic agent may
need adjusting during concomitant therapy (145).

Antidiabetic
agentldiuretic
chlorthalidone
ethacrynic acid
frusemide
thiazides
triamterene

Diuretics tend to elevate the blood sugar level in
diabetics and prediabetics. Thiazides and
chlorthalidone antagonize the action of antidiabetic
drugs particularly the sulphonylureas. The mechanism
of interaction is uncertain but it is believed that K+
loss induced by some diuretics may be partially
responsible (146). Patients should be monitored for
diabetic control and, If necessary, a less diabetogenic
diuretic (e.g. indapamide) should be substituted.

Acetazolamide

Acetazolamide has been reported to cause
symptomatic metabolic acidosis in the elderly and in
diabetic patients. It should be given with care to
diabetics and they should have urea and electrolyte
concentrations measured before and during treatment
with acetazolamide (147-150).

Amiloride

Elderly diabetic patients are at particular risk of
developing hyperkalaemia when treated with this
diuretic (151).

Antidiabetic agent/
Karela

Karela (Mornordica charantia) a component of Indian
curry has been anecdotally related to one case of
potentiation of hypoglycaemic effects of
chlorpropamide. It is used by Asian imigrants in the
UK to treat diabetes (152).

Antidiabetic agenuoral
contraceptive

The potential effects of oral contraceptives on glucose
tolerance are of particular concern because of the risk
that impaired glucose tolerance will exacerbate their
cardiovasular effects (153). Early studies suggested that
that the prevalence of abnormal glucose tolerance in
oral contraceptive users was increased from about 4 to
35%, but subsequent studies produced conflicting

DRUGS USED IN DIABETES

Combination

423

Interaction

results. The decrease in glucose tolerance depends not
only on the oestrogen dose but also on the type of
progestogen. Levonorgestrel has been reported to be
the most potent progestogen in reducing glucose
tolerance (154). Subsequent studies have suggested
that glucose tolerance testing may not be the best way
of assessing the effects of oral contraceptive on
carbohydrate metabolism (155). Insulin and C-peptide
production was measured and and it was shown that
although levonorgestrel-containing combined
preparations had a greater effect on glucose tolerance,
desogestrel- or norethindrone-containing preparations
produced a similar degree of insulin resistance,
suggesting that this depends on the oestrogenic
component, and is modified by the progestogen (155).
Oral contraceptives do appear to increase the
subsequent risk of developing type 2 diabetes (156),
and they increase the insulin requirements of diabetics
(157, 158). The use of other methods of contraception
should be considered for diabetic patients, if this is not
practicable, patients should be checked more closely
for decreased diabetic control. Diabetogenic effects
will depend on a number of factors including type and
dose of oral contraceptive components, type of patient
and duration of administration.
Antidiabetic agent/
smoking

Studies in ketone-prone insulin-dependent diabetics
have shown an average decrease of 113% in insulin
absorption in the first 30 min after smoking (159).
Previous studies have shown that diabetic smokers
need on average 10-20% more insulin than nonsmokers. This percentage increases to 30% in heavy
smokers (160). Diabetic patients should be advised to
stop smoking.

Antidiabetic agent/
sulphinpyrazone

Sulphinpyrazone can displace sulphonylureas from
plasma protein binding. and may possibly increase
their activity. Co-administration of sulphinpyrazone
(200 mg, 6-hourly) and tolbutamide (500 mg i.v. over
10 min) reduced mean plasma and prolonged
tolbutamide by 40% and prolonged its mean half-life
by 80% (161). Avoid this combination; it would be

424

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antidiabetic agent/
sulphinpyrazone cont.

prudent to anticipate the same interaction with other
sulphonylureas.

Antidiabetic agent/
sympathomimetic
ritodrine

Care is required when sympathomimetic agents are
given to diabetics. Ritodrine, a direct-acting
sympathomimetic with predominantly P-adrenergic
activity was given by i.v. infusion to delay contractions
in preterm labour. Hyperglycaemia (21.5 mmoV1) and
ketoacidosis resulted. The patient delivered a stillborn
baby (162). As diabetics do not have an adequate
insulin response to handle P-adrenergic-induced
hyperglycaemia, there is a danger that metabolic
acidosis may occur.

Antidiabetic agent/
thyroid hormones

As thyroid status influences metabolic activity and
most body systems, correction of hypothyroidism with
thyroid hormones may affect other disease states and
their treatment, The initiation of thyroid replacement
therapy may increase insulin or oral hypoglycaemic
requirements (163, 164).

Insulidglass and plastics

The adsorption of insulin onto glass and plastics used
in administration sets has been decreased by the
addition of albumin or polygeline to insulin solutions.
Some workers consider this to be unnecessary since in
practice insulin adsorption is not a major proble (165,
166). Running approximately 10 ml of the insulin
solution through the intravenous tubing before
beginning the infusion has been suggested by some
(166). See also Chapter 13 Interactions with Medicinal
Plastics.

Insulidglucagon

Glucagon is injected in the treatment of insulininduced hypoglycaemia when administration of i.v.
glucose is not possible. Intranasal preparations are
being developed. Supplementary carbohydrate should
be given once the patient has responded to prevent
secondary hypoglycaemia (167) This agent is also used
in the treatment of p-blocker poisoning (168).

DRUGS USED IN DIABETES

425

REFERENCES

1 Reynolds JEF. (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 341.
2 Marchetti P, Navalesi R. (1989) Clin Pharmacokinet 16, 100.
3 Syvalahti EKG et al. (1974) Lancet ii, 232.
4 Kansal PC et al. (1969) South Med J 62, 1374.
5 Christensen LK, Stowed L. (1969) Lancet ii, 1397.
6 Lazar JD, Wilner KD. (1990) Rev Infect Dis 12 (Suppl. 3), S327.
7 Krishnaiuah YSR et al. (1994) Br J Clin Pharmacol37, 205.
8 Meurice JC et al. (1983) Presse Med 12, 1670.
9 Soeldner JS, Steinke J. (1965) J A M A 193, 148.
10 Wing LMH, Miners JO. (1985) Br J Clin Pharmacol20, 482.
11 Johnson JF, Dobmeier ME. (1990) DZCP A n n Pharmacother 24, 250.
12 Andreasen PB et al. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacoll2, 581.
13 Elvander-Stlhl E et al. (1984) Br J Clin Pharmacol 18, 773.
14 Harris EL. (1971) Br Med J 3 , 29.
15 Richardson T et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol22, 43.
16 Judis J. (1973) J Pharm Sci 62, 232.
17 McKillop G et al. (1986) Br Med J 293, 1073.
18 Ferrari C et al. (1976) N Engl J Med 294, 1184.
19 Jain AK et al. (1985) N Engl J Med 293, 1283.
20 Sturgess I, Sonksen PH. (1988) Prescribersí J 28, 164.
21 Rett K et al. (1988) N Engl J Med 319, 1609.
22 Arauz-Pacheco C et al. (1990) Am J Med 89, 811.
23 Feely J, Peden N. (1983) Br J Clin Pharmacol 15, 607P.
24 True BL et al. (1987) Am J Psychiatry 144, 1220.
25 McMurray J , Fraser DM. (1986) Lancet i, 1035.
26 Verdy M et al. (1983) Znt J Obes 7 , 289.
27 Gachalyi B et al. (1980) Znt J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxic01 18, 133.
28 MacWalter RS et al. (1985) Br J Clin Pharmacol 19, 121P.
29 Birkett DJ et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 14, 574P.
30 OByrne S, Feely J (1990) Drugs 40, 6 (Part l), 203 (Part 11).
31 Zaman R , Kendall MJ. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 13, 507.
32 Seltzer HS. (1989) Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 18, 163.
33 Ferriere M et al. (1985) A n n Intern Med 102, 134.
34 McMurray J, Fraser DM. (1986) Lancet i, 1035.
35 Gupta KK, Lillicrap CA. (1968) Br Med J 2, 697.
36 Caprio S et al. (1984) Diabetologia 27, 52.
37 Miller JB. (1966) Br Med J 2, 1007.
38 Zumoff B, Hellman L. (1977) J A M A 237, 1960.
39 Pershadsingh H A et al. (1987) J A M A 257, 930.
40 Wood SM et al. (1981) Br Med J 282, 946.
41 British National Formulary (1996) No. 31, Appendix i, p. 544.
42 Pengelly CR. (1965) Br Med J 1, 1312.
43 Kriiger H-U. (1966) Med Klin 61, 1462.
44 Luntz GRWN, Smith SG. (1953) Br Med J 1, 296.
45 Clissold SP, Edwards C. (1988) Drugs 35, 214.
46 Hotta N et al. (1993) Diabetic Med 10, 134.
47 Balfour JA, McTavish D. (1993) Drugs 46, 1025.
48 Anon. (1994) Drug Ther Bull 32, 51.
49 Chiasson J-L et al. (1994) A n n Intern Med 121, 928.
50 Arky RA et al. (1968) J A M A 206, 575.

426

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

51 Editorial (1968) J A M A 206, 575.
52 Fitzgerald MG et al. (1962) Diabetes 2, 40.
53 Connor H , Marks V. (1985) H u m Nutr Appl Nutr 39A, 393.
54 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin (1996) 34, 36.
55 Johnson HK, Waterhouse C. (1968) Am J Med 45, 98.
56 Davidson MB et al. (1966) N Engl J Med 275, 886.
57 Schaffalitzky de Muckadell OB et al. (1979) Acta Med Scand 206, 269.
58 Kater RMH et al. (1969) Am J Med Sci 258, 35.
59 Kater RMH et al. (1969) J A M A 207, 363.
60 Iber FL. (1977) Clin Pharmacol Ther 22, 735.
61 Leslie RDG, Pyke DA. (1978) Br Med J 2 , 1519.
62 Pyke DA, Leslie RDG. (1978) Br Med J 2 , 1421.
63 Strakosch CR et al. (1980) Lancet i , 394.
64 Leslie RDG et al. (1979) Lancet i , 341.
65 Ohlin H et al. (1982) Br Med J 285, 838.
66 Kobberling J, Weber M. (1980) Lancet i , 538.
67 De Silva NE et al. (1981) Lancet i , 128.
68 Kobberling J et al. (1980) Diabetologia 19, 359.
69 Barnett AH, Pyke DA. (1981) Lancet i, 2232.
70 Jerntorp P et al. (1981) Diabetes 30, 788.
71 Capretti L et al. (1981) Br Med J 283, 1361.
72 Landon J et al. (1963) Metabolism 12, 924.
73. Baciewicz AM, Swatford WB. (1984) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 18, 309.
74 Dall JLC et al. (1967) Scot Med 12, 403.
75 Dickson I. (1962) Med J Aust 49, 325.
76 Tashima CK. (1971) Br Med J 4 , 557.
77 Blumenthal SA, Streeten DHP. (1976) A n n Intern Med 84, 55.
78 Kristensen M, Hansen JM. (1967) Diabetes 16, 211.
79 Solomon HM, Schrojie JJ. (1967) Metabolism 16, 1029.
80 Kristensen M, Hansen JM. (1968) Acta Med Scand 183, 83.
81 Chaplin H , Cassell M. (1958) Am J Med Sci 235, 706.
82 Poucher RL, Vecchio TJ. (1966) J A M A 197, 1069.
83 Jahnchen E et al. (1976) Eur J Clin Pharmacol 10, 349.
84 Heine P et al. (1976) Eur J Clin Pharmacol 10, 31.
85 Ohnhaus EE et al. (1983) Klin Wochenschr 61, 851.
86 Jassal BV. (1991) Br Med J 303, 789.
87 Semple CG et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol22, 187.
88 Cooper AJ, Ashcroft G. (1966) Lancet i , 407.
89 Griffin’s JP, DArcy PF. (1974) Prescribersí J 14, 103.
90 Krishnaiah YSR. (1994) Br J Clin Pharmacol37, 205.
91 Lazar J et al.. (1990) Rev Infect Dis 12 (Suppl.3), S327.
92 Allan SG, Leonard RCF. (1986) Lancet i , 1035.
93 Winocur P et al. (1986) Lancet ii, 461.
94 Passa P et al. (1987) Diabetes Care 10, 200.
95 Seefeldt T et al. (1990) Diabetic Med 7 , 700.
96 Oksa A et al. (1992) J Cardiovasc Pharmacol23, 79.
97 Herings RMC et al. (1995) Lancet 345, 1195.
98 Vuorinen-Markkola H , Yki-Jarvinen H. (1995) Metabolism 64,85.
99 Griffin JP (1979) In: DArcy PF, Griffin JP. (eds) Iatrogenic diseases, 2nd edn, Oxford,
Oxford University Press, p. 211.
100 Veterans Administration Cooperative Study Group on Antihypertensive Agents (1985).
IV Effect on plasma glucose and glucose tolerance. Hypertension 7 , 1008.
101 Pollare T et al. (1989) Br Med J 298, 1152.

DRUGS USED IN DIABETES

427

102 Skarfors, ET et al. (1989) Br Med J 298, 1147.
103 Hansten PD. (1980) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 14, 46
104 Kolendorf K et al. (1982) Acta Med Scand 211, 175.
105 Zaman R et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 13, 507.
106 Nilsson-Ehle P et al. (1988) Acta Med Scand 224, 131.
107 Molitch ME et al. (1986) Curr Ther Res 39, 398.
108 Okada S et al. (1986) J Int Med Res 14, 299.
109 Guthrie GP et al. (1993) Clin Pharmacol Ther 34, 713.
110 Moffat B. (1985) Br Med J 290, 822.
111 Young E et al. (1984) Ann Intern Med 101, 282.
112 Charles S et al. (1981) Br Med J 283, 19.
113 Giugliano D et al. (1980) Eur J Clin Pharmacol 18, 359.
114 Bhatnagar SM et al. (1984) Br Med J 289, 19.
115 Zezulka AV et al. (1984) Br Med J 289, 437.
116 Kandall MJ et al. (1986) J Clin Hosp Pharm 11, 175.
117 Pershadsing HF et al. (1987) J A M A 257, 930.
118 Schoen RE et al. (1988) Am J Med 84, 492.
119 Palumbo G et al. (1988) Curr Ther Res 43, 171.
120 Heyman SN et al. (1989) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 23, 236.
121 Rojdmark S, Anderson S. (1984) Acta Med Scand 681 (Suppl), 37.
122 Harrower ADB, Donnelly T. (1981) Br Med J 283, 796.
123 Donnelly T, Harrower AD. (1980) Curr Med Res Opin 6, 690.
124 Vessey B et al. (1983) Curr Ther Res 33, 1075.
125 Brauman A et al. (1984) Diabetologia 27, 260A.
126 Dante A. (1986) Ann Intern Med 104, 125.
127 Pasanisi F et al. (1986) Curr Ther Res 36, 894.
128 Greenwood RH. (1982) Br Med J 284, 50.
129 Abadie E , Passa P. (1984) Br Med J 289, 438.
130 Antonelli D. (1985) Ann Intern Med 104, 125.
131 Whitcroft I et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol 22, 208P.
132 Tentorio A et al. (1989) Eur J Clin Pharmacol 36, 311.
133 Wishinsky H et al. (1962) Diabetes 2 (Suppl), 18.
134 Pandit MK et al. (1993) Ann Intern Med 118, 529.
135 Raschke R et al. (1991) Arch Intern Med 151, 591.
136 Stowers JM, Hunter RB.(1959) Ann N Y Acad Sci 74, 689.
137 Chemer R et al. (1963) J A M A 185, 883.
138 Peaston MJT, Finnegan P. (1968) Br J Clin Pract 22, 30.
139 Allen PA, Taylor RT. (1980) Br Med J 281, 1642.
140 Harris EL. (1971) Br Med J 3, 29
141 Field JB et al. (1967) N Engl J Med 277, 889.
142 Slade IH, Iosefa RN. (1967) J Am Geriatr SOC15, 948.
143 Somogyi A et al. (1987) Br J Clin Pharmacol23, 545.
144 Daubresse J-C et al. (1976) N Engl J Med 294, 613.
145 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 1305.
146 Hickman JW, Kirtley WR. (1968) J Indiana State Med Assoc 61, 1114.
147 Maisey DN, Brown RD. (1987) Br Med J 283, 1527.
148 Goodfield M et al. (1982) Br Med J 284, 422.
149 Reid W, Harrower ADB. (1982) Br Med J 284, 114.
150 Heller I et al. (1985) Arch Intern Med 145, 1815.
151 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 816.
152 Aslam M, Stockley IH. (1979) Lancet i, 607.

428

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

153 Taylor R. (1986) Adv Drug React Bull December, 452.
154 Perlman JA et al. (1985) J Chron Dis 38, 857.
155 Godsland IF et al. (1991) J Clin Endocrinol Metab 74, 64.
156 Rimm EB et al. (1992) Diabetologia 35, 967.
157 Editorial. (1967) Br Med J 3, 726.
158 Oral Contraceptives (1974) Bulletin Vol. 5 No. 3, Health Protection Branch, Department
of health and Welfare, Canada.
159 Klemp P et al. (1982) Br Med J 284, 237.
160 Madsbad S et al. (1980) Diabetes Care 3, 41.
161 Miners J O et al. (1982) Eur J Pharmacol22, 321.
162 Hansten PD. (1975) Drug Interactions 3rd edn. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia. p. 59.
163 Refetoff S et al. (1975) Med Clin North Am 59, 1147.
164 Zinn WJ, Schleissner. LA (1964) Calif Med 101, 240.
165 Alberti KGMM. (1989) Br Med Bull 45, 242.
166 Sanson TH, Levine SN. (1989) Drugs 38, 289.
167 Hvidberg A et al. (1994) Eur J Clin Pharmacol 46, 15.
168 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 1710.

6.2 INTERACTIONS WITH
CORTICOSTEROIDS
CORTICOSTEROIDS WITH MAJOR GLUCOCORTICOID EFFECTS
Beclomethasone diproprionate
Fluprednisolone
Betamethasone
Hydrocortisone (cortisol)
Budesonide
Medrysone
Ciclomethasone
Meprednisone
Cortisone acetate
Methylprednisolone
Cortivazol
Paramethasone acetate
Prednisolone
Deflazacort
Dexamethasone
Prednisone
Flumethasone pivalate
Prednylidene
Flunisolide
Tixocortol pivalate
Fluoromethalone acetate
Triamcinolone
CORTICOSTEROIDS WITH MAJOR MINERALOCORTICOID EFFECTS
Aldosterone
Deoxycortone acetate
Fludrocortisone acetate
INTRODUCTION
The spectrum of drug-drug interactions involving corticosteroids is limited and the
mechanisms involved are largely well understood. For example, glucocorticoids (see
above list) can induce cytochromes P450 CYP3A3, 3A4, 3A5, and 3A7, and may
compete for metabolism with a number of drug substances including cyclosporin,
erythromycin, lidocaine, midazolam, nifedipine, quinidine and warfarin, which are
metabolized by the same enzyme system (1). It is not surprising, therefore, that
interactions between some of these drugs and individual corticosteroids have been
reported in the clinic.
The pharmacokinetics of corticosteroids can be modified by concomitant use of
P450-inducing agents (e.g. phenytoin or rifampicin) or P450-inhibiting drugs (e.g.
cimetidine) and these interactions are largely predictable. The glucocorticoid action
of corticosteroids will influence the actions of insulin and oral hypoglycaemics.
The mineralocorticoids (see above list) are rarely used, exceptions include the
treatment of primary adrenal insufficiency, in which both mineralocorticoid and
glucocorticoid replacement is necessary. Mineralocorticoids can, by Na+ and water

429

430

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

retention, reduce the effects of hypotensives and greatly influence the adverse
effects of concomitant diuretics or other potassium-losing drugs. These effects may
underlie significant clinical interactions. Many of these interactions were discovered
during the early use of corticosteroids and are now well recognized. Generally, such
interactions do not occur with inhaled corticosteroids or topical preparations unless
dosage is high and prolonged. Interactions are largely confined to oral or systemically administered steroids. A recent review has summarized the adverse effects
of corticosteroids and their interactions in man (2).
The Table of Drug Interactions summarizes some of these established interactions.
Cornbination

Interaction

Corticosteroids/
anticoagulants

Corticosteroids may potentiate the effects of warfarin
and can induce gastric ulceration with dangerous
haemorrhage in anticoagulated patients (3).
Ulceration may go unnoticed due to the euphoric
effects of corticosteroids.

Corticosteroidd
antidiabetics

Antagonism of hypoglycaemic effects. Corticosteroids
have intrinsic hyperglycaemic activity and may induce
diabetes mellitus or may upset the established control
of the diabetic patient (4,5).

Corticosteroids/
anti-emetics

Dexamethasone makes a significant contribution to the
efficacy of ondansetron in the control of acute
cisplatinum-induced emesis (6).

Cortocosteroids/
anti-epileptics

Carbamazepine, phenobarbitone, phenytoin and
primidone are all hepatic P450 enzyme inducers and
will accelerate the metabolism of corticosteroids and
reduce their effects (7-9).

Corticosteroids/
antihypertensives

The mineralocorticoid effects of corticosteroids, Na'
and water retention may antagonize the effects of
concomitant hypotensive therapy (10).

Corticosteroidslaspirin

Corticosteroids decrease the blood salicylate
concentration by increasing the glomerular filtration
rate. Decreasing corticosteroid dosage in patients on
aspirin may result in increased serum salicylate levels
with the possibility of salicylism (11).
Corticosteroids and aspirin are both ulcerogenic (12).

INTERACTIONS WITH CORTICOSTEROIDS

Cornbination

431

Interaction

Corticosteroidshile
acid-binding resins

Colestipol causes a significant impairment of oral
hydrocortisone absorption (13).

Corticosteroids/cardiac
glycosides

Hypokalaemia due to corticosteroids potentiates the
effect of cardiac glycosides (14).

Corticosteroids/
chlorpromazine

Chlorpromazine reduces gut motility and may enhance
the absorption of oral corticosteroids (15).

Corticosteroids/
cyc1osporin

A mutual inhibition of metabolism occurs between
cyclosporin and corticosteroids increasing the plasma
concentration of both agents (16). Increased plasma
cyclosporin levels increase the danger of nephrotoxicity
(17-22).

Corticosteroids/diuretics

Mineralocorticoids promote Naf and water retention
and antagonize diuretic effects; acetazolamide,
frusemide, other loop diuretics and thiazides increase
the risk of hypokalaemia. Potassium-losing diuretics
given together with corticosteroids may produce
serious hypokalaemia (10).

Corticosteroids/
contraceptives

Oestrogens enhance the anti-inflammatory action of
corticosteroids and retard the metabolism of cortisol
possibly by its increased binding to globulin (23).
Contraceptive failure has been reported in women
using intra-uterine devices and taking corticosteroids
(24).
There have been several reports of an enhanced effect
of corticosteroids in women receiving oestrogens or
taking oral contraceptives, the dose of corticosteroid
may need to be reduced (24, 25).

Cortocosteroids/
rifampicin

Rifampicin is a potent inducer of cytochrome P450; it
accelerates the metabolism of corticosteroids and
reduces their clinical efficacy (26).
Acute adrenal crisis has been precipitated by
rifampicin in patients with adrenal insufficiency (27),
and induction of microsomal enzyme systems may be
enough to compromize even patients with mildly
impaired cortisol production. Critical hypotension has

432

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Cortocosteroids/
rifampicin cont.

also developed in non-Addisonian patients within 7-10
days of starting rifampicin therapy (28).
Rifampicin reduces the half-life of cortisol and steroid
requirements are increased four-fold in Addison’s
disease (29). Antitubercular rifampicin therapy in
patients with renal transplants caused increased
metabolism of corticosteroids and onset of signs of
graft rejection (30).
Treatment of nephrotic syndrome by prednisolone in a
child also receiving rifampicin plus isoniazid failed and
then improved when the two antitubercular agents
were stopped (31, 32). The plasma clearance of
prednisolone increased by 45% when rifampicin was
given (32) and prednisolone dosage had to be
increased by 93% when asthmatic patients also took
rifampicin (33).

Corticosteroids/
&-sympathomimetics

Corticosteroids in high dosage increase the risk of
hypokalaemia with high doses of bambuterol,
eformoterol, fenoterol, pirbuterol, reproterol,
rimiterol, ritodrine, salbutamol, salmeterol, terbutaline
and tulobuterol (34).

Corticosteroids/
ulcer-healing drugs

Concomitant administration of corticosteroids,
especially mineralocorticoids with carbenoxolone,
increases the risk of hypokalaemia.
Pseudoaldosteronism is a possible risk of therapy with
carbenoxolone (35).

REFERENCES

1 Gonzalez FJ. (1993) In: Schenkman JB, Greim H (eds) Cytochrome P450, Springer,
Heidelberg, pp. 239-257.
2 DArcy PF. (1996) In: Harvey PW (ed) The Adrenal in Toxicology: Target Organ and
Modulator of Toxicity, Taylor & Francis, London, pp. 261-277.
3 Koch-Weser J, Sellers EM. (1971) N Engl J Med 285, 487, 547.
4 O’Byrne S, Feely J. (1990) Drugs 40, 6.
5 Taylor R. (1986) Adv Drug React Bull 127 (December), 452.
6 Smyth JF et al. (1991) Br Med J 303, 1423.
7 Werk E E et al. (1969) N Engl J Med 281, 32.
8 Boylan JJ et al. (1976) JAMA 235, 803.
9 McLelland J, Jack W. (1978) Lancet i, 1096.
10 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martinale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 1020.
11 Klinenberg JR, Miller F. (1965) JAMA 194, 601.

INTERACTIONS WITH CORTICOSTEROIDS

433

12 Emmanuel JH, Montgomery RD. (1971) Postgrad Med J 47, 227.
13 Nekl KE, Aron DC. (1993) Ann Pharmacother 327, 980.
14 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 852.
15 Forrest FM et al. (1970) J Biol Psychiatry 2, 53.
16 Yee GC, McGuire TR. (1990) Clin Pharmacokinet 19, 400.
17 Calne RY. (1980) Nephron 26, 57.
18 Boogaerts MA et al. (1982) Lancet ii, 1216.
19 Durrant S et al. (1982) Lancet ii, 829.
20 Langhoff E, Madsen S. (1983) Lancet ii, 1031.
21 Klintmalm G, Sawe J. (1984) Lancet i, 731.
22 O s t L et al. (1985) Transplant Proc 17, 1252.
23 Spangler AS et al. (1969) J Clin Endocrinol Metabol29, 650.
24 Anonymous. (1983) Drug Interaction News 3, 48.
25 Back DJ, Orme MLE. (1990) Clin Pharmacokinet 18, 472.
26 Venkatesan K. (1992) Clin Pharmacokinet 22, 47.
27 Elansary EH, Earis JE. (1983) Postgrad Med J 47, 227.
28 Boss G. (1983) Br Med J 287, 52.
29 Edwards OM et al. (1974) Lancet ii, 549.
30 Buffington GA et al. (1976) J A M A 236, 1958.
31 Hendrickse W et al. (1979) B r Med J 1, 306.
32 McAllister WAC et al. (1983) Br Med J 286, 923.
33 Powell-Jackson PR et al. (1983) Am Rev Resp Dis 128, 307.
34 British National Formulary. (1996) No. 31, British Medical Association and The Royal
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London, p. 558.
35 Pinder RM et al. (1976) Drugs 11, 245.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

6.3 INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS USED
IN THE TREATMENT AND
PREVENTION OF OSTEOPOROSIS
Four main groups and one subsidiary group of substances are used in the treatment
and prevention of osteoporosis.
Firstly, oestrogens: these may or may not be administered in combination with
progestogens for post-menopausal hormone replacement therapy or long term in
the prevention of osteoporosis.
The most widely prescribed products in this group are those containing conjugated
oestrogens derived from pregnant mares’ urine and may be taken in doses of
0.625, 1.25 or 2.5 mg without or with norgestrel 0.15 mg Premarin or Prempak C,
respectively.
All oral preparations of oestrogen are subject to first pass metabolism in the
intestine and liver. Therefore formulations of oestrogen in subcutaneous implants
or dermal patches have been developed for use in hormone replacement therapy
(HRT) .
Secondly, male sex hormones are being used in the treatment of recently recognized
age-related male osteoporosis.
Thirdly, the calcitonins, of which pork, eel, salmon and synthetic human calcitonins
are used therapeutically. The calcitonins are polypeptide hormones of molecular
weight of about 3500, involved in the regulation of calcium and bone metabolism.
They all have the property of lowering plasma calcium by diminishing the rate of
bone resorption by inhibition of osteoclast activity. They are used in Paget’s disease
of bone, hypercalcaemia in malignant disease, and salmon calcitonin has been used
intranasally in post-menopausal osteoporosis (1,2) and in children with osteoporosis
associated with nephrosis (3).
Synthetic salmon calcitonin is more potent than porcine calcitonin and is weight
for weight more potent than the other calcitonins. In the high doses of salmon
calcitonin used in the treatment of Paget’s disease of bone it has a rapid and
profound pain-releasing action which is too rapid to be due entirely to its effects
on bone resorption.
A number of hypotheses have been proposed to account for the analgesic effect
of calcitonin. Current thinking is that this is due to the involvement of the endogen-

435

436

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

ous opioid system. Plasma concentrations of p-endorphin has been shown to rise
after intranasal administration of calcitonin in healthy subjects (4).
Corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis may respond to calcitonin treatment ( 5 ) . Side
effects of calcitonin therapy are nausea, vomiting, flushing, tingling of the hands
and unpleasant taste. Local reactions of injection site have been reported.
Fourthly, the bisphosphonates, disodium etidronate, disodium pamidronate, sodium
clodronate, tiludronate. Bisphosphonates are absorbed onto hydroxyapatite crystals, so slowing both their rate of growth and dissolution, and reducing the rate of
bone turnover.
Prolonged treatment of osteoporosis with etidronate in excess of 4 years has been
shown on bone biopsy to lead to an excess of peritrabecular fibrosis and histologically defined mild to moderate osteomalacia. Osteoid, which may accumulate at
high doses of continuous etidronate therapy, is able to be mineralized normally
after discontinuation of therapy.
Hyperphosphataemia has been observed in patients on bisphosphonate therapy
and is apparently due to a drug-related increase in renal tubular reabsorption of
phosphate. It is not usually grounds for discontinuing therapy. Serum phosphate
levels return to normal 2-4 weeks after discontinuing therapy.
Side effects of bisphosphonates are mainly gastrointestinal, involving diarrhoea,
abdominal pain, constipation, nausea, vomiting. Dermatological hypersensitivity
reactions have been reported. There have been rare reports of leucopoenia, agranulocytosis and pancytopenia. Mild leg cramps occur in 5% of patients on etidronate. Peripheral neuropathy has also been recorded.
Finally, sodium fluoride is the only bone formation-stimulating drug that has been
widely tested. In two major, adequately controlled clinical trials, fluoride at a dosage
of 75 mg/day substantially increased bone mass but did not significantly decrease
the rate of vertebral fractures. Preliminary results with use of a lower dosage
(50 mg/day) in a delayed-release variant indicated a decrease in the rate of vertebral
fractures. These early results, however, must be confirmed, and the therapeutic
window of fluoride will likely be small. Furthermore, direct studies of bone from
patients treated with a dosage of 50 mg/day indicate increased fragility of the fluoride-treated bone. Thus the future role of sodium fluoride in the treatment of
osteoporosis is currently unclear. The use of sodium fluoride in osteoporosis has
been reviewed by Khasla and Riggs ( 6 ) .
DRUG INTERACTIONS
Drug interactions with oestrogens used in the treatment of osteoporosis are dealt
with in the specific chapter on oestrogens and progestogens. There are no clinically
relevant interactions with male sex hormones or calcitonin. Drug interactions with
bisphosphonates are also not common. Articles in the literature contain specific
warnings about the interactions between etidronate and vitamins or foods with a

DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT AND PREVENTION OF OSTEOPOROSIS

437

mineral supplement or content. Materials with a high calcium content such as
milk, may reduce the absorption of disodium etidronate. Vitamins with mineral
supplements such as iron, calcium, laxatives containing magnesium, or antacids
containing calcium or aluminium should not be taken within 2 hr of dosing with
disodium etidronate. The elderly patient with osteoporosis may need special counselling to understand when to take calcium or iron supplements, which are often
recommended to the elderly because of deficient dietary intake. Such restrictions
may appear irrational to the elderly osteoporotic patient unless properly explained
(13).
Other bisphosphonates used in the treatment of osteoporosis interact with food,
mineral ions and vitamins with mineral supplements in the same way as disodium
etidronate (7, 14-18). Fleish (17) cautioned that the absorption of bisphosphonates
is diminished in the presence of calcium, and that bisphosphonates should not be
given before meals and never together with milk products.
No interactions between any of the bisphosphonates and other drug therapies
have been reported, other than the risk of development of severe hypocalcaemia
when bisphosphonates are given concomitantly with aminoglycoside antibiotics (19).
The warning about interactions between bisphosphonates and aminoglycoside antibiotics resulting in severe hypocalcaemia is given in the British National Formulary
but is not given in any of the Data Sheets in the ABPI Data Sheet Compendium
(1995-96) (20-22). However, the Data Sheet for disodium pamidronate does warn
that pamidronate should not be co-administered with plicamycin (Mithramycin) .
Plicamycin lowers serum calcium and also blocks the hypercalcaemic action of
vitamin D. It has been suggested that plicamycin may lower serum calcium levels
by inhibiting the effect of parathyroid hormone on osteoclasts. Plicamycin inhibition
of DNA-dependent RNA synthesis appear to render osteoclasts unable to fully
respond to parathyroid hormone with the biosynthesis necessary for osteolysis.

SYNERGISTIC EFFECTS
A few studies have been published which appear to indicate a synergistic action or
additive effect between treatments (23-24). In one study, 6 months treatment with
etidronate followed by 6 months treatment with calcitonin was considered to be of
greater benefit than using the treatments the other way round (25). Rico et al. (26)
on the basis of biochemical studies has claimed that calcitonin plus etidronate for
10 days a month produced more marked biochemical effects than the same regimen
for 10 days followed sequentially by 20 days of etidronate.
In a 2-year study by MacIntyre et al. (27) it was shown that in a dose range of
2000-6000 IU of salmon calcitonin in post-menopausal women given with oestrogen
+ progestrogen, there was an additive effect on bone mineral density over that
achieved by calcitonin alone.

438

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

REFERENCES

1 Rizzato G et al. (1989) Curr Ther Res 45, 761.
2 Overgaard K et al. (1990) Am J Med 89, 106.
3 Nishioka T et al. (1991) J Pediatr 118, 703.
4 Franceschi R et al. (1989) Eur J Clin Pharmacol37, 341.
5 Ringe JD, Welzel D. (1987) Euro J Clin Pharmacol33, 35.
6 Khosla S , Riggs B. (1995) Mayo Clin Proc 70, 978.
7 Simon C, Schlienger JL. (1984) J Med Strasbourg 15, 191.
8 Murray JJ, Healy MD. (1991) J Am Diet Assoc 91, 66.
9 Fels JP et al. (1989) Calcif Tissue Znt 44 (Suppl), S104.
10 Fogelman I et al. (1984) Calcif Tissue Znt 36 (Suppl 2), S74.
11 Fogelman I et al. (1986) Clin Endocrinol24, 57.
12 Lin J H et al. (1991) Drug Metabol Dispos 19, 926.
13 D’Arcy PF. (1995) Adv Drug React Toxic01 Rev 14, 233.
14 Lin J H et al. (1991) Pharmacologist 33, 209.
15 Lin JH et al. (1991) Pharm Res 8 (Suppl), S273.
16 Necciari J et al. (1992) 5th World Conference on Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics
July 26-31, 1992, Yokahama, Japan (abstract), p. 305.
17 Fleisch H. (1987) Clin Orthop Relat Res 217, 72.
18 Douglas DL et al. (1980) Lancet i , 1043.
19 British National Formulary. (March 1996) No. 31, Appendix 1, p. 541.
20 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p. 266
(sodium clodronate).
21 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p. 364
(disodium pamidronate) .
22 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1346.
23 Hosking DJ et al. (1976) Lancet i , 615.
24 Bijroet OLM. (1980) Lancet i , 1416.
25 Perry HM et al. (1984) Arch Intern Med 144, 929.
26 Rico H et al. (1988) Bone 9, 63.
27 MacIntyre I et al. (1988) Lancet i , 900.

CHAPTER 7
Drug Interactions with Oral Contraceptives
INTRODUCTION (based on British National Formulary (1))
Oral contraceptives are divided into two main types: ‘combined’ which contain an
oestrogen and a progestogen, and ‘progestogen-only’. Hormonal preparations are
also available for emergency contraception which are used after unprotected intercourse and before implantation of the fertilized egg in the uterus. Long-acting
hormonal contraceptive preparations have been developed for subcutaneous implantation or depot intramuscular injection.
Many reports have been published on adverse reactions and interactions associated with the use of combined oral contraceptives. Much of this information
involves older preparations containing higher doses of oestrogen and progestogen
than are used currently.
I. COMBINED
In this type an orally active progestogen (e.g. ethynodiol, levonorgestrel, norethisterone) is given in conjunction with an orally active oestrogen (e.g. ethinyloestradiol
or mestranol). The oestrogen content ranges from 20 to 50 pg, and generally a
preparation with the lowest oestrogen and progestogen content which gives good
cycle control and minimal side-effects in the individual woman is chosen. Low
strength preparations (containing 20 pg ethinyloestradiol) are particularly suitable
for obese or older woman. Standard strength preparations (containing ethinyloestradiol 30 or 35 or 30/40 pg phased preparations) are appropriate for standard use in
the case of those also containing ethynodrel, levonorgestrel or norethisterone. Phase
preparations are more complex to take, but provide better cycle control than
the equivalent ‘monophasic’ levonorgestrel or norethisterone formulations. High
strength preparations (containing either ethinyloestradiol50 p.g or mestranol50 p.g)

439

440

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

provide greater contraceptive security but with an increased possibility of side
effects. These are used mainly in the circumstances of reduced bioavailability.

Advice from the Committee on Safety of Medicines
The CSM has advised that results of studies on the safety of oral contraceptives in
relation to venous thromboembolism have provided reassurance about thromboembolic risks associated with oral contraceptives containing levonorgestrel, norethisterone or ethynodiol (excess risk around five to ten cases per 100000 women per
annum) (2). The studies, however, indicated that combined oral contraceptives
containing the newer progestogens, desogestrel and gestodene, are associated with
around a two-fold increase in the risk. There is insufficient information to know
whether there is any increased risk of thromboembolism associated with combined
oral contraceptives containing norgestimate (3-7).
The CSM has advised that combined oral contraceptives containing gestodene
and desogestrel should not be used by woman with risk factors for venous thromboembolism, including obesity, varicose veins, or a previous history of thromboembolism from any cause, Combined oral contraceptive preparations containing desogestrel or gestodene should only be used by women who are intolerant of other
combined oral contraceptives, and are prepared to accept an increased risk of
thromboembolism (2).
The timing and the means by which the CSMs advice was transmitted was initially
criticized by some authorities but subsequent published evidence confirmed the
CSMs concern (8).

11. PROGESTOGEN-ONLY
With this type of contraception small doses of progestogen (ethynodiol diacetate,
norethisterone, or levonorgestrel) have to be taken daily throughout the cycle in a
continuous schedule, These preparations are less effective than the combined type
oral contraceptives, and since their action appears to be short lived there tends to
be a greater risk of pregnancy if tablets are missed. Oral progestogen-only preparations may offer a suitable alternative when oestrogens are contraindicated, but they
have a higher failure rate than combined preparations. They are suitable for older
women, for heavy smokers and for those with hypertension, valvular heart disease,
diabetes mellitus or migraine. Menstrual irregularities (oligomenorrhoea, menorrhagia) are more common but tend to resolve on long-term treatment (1).

111. POST-COITAL (Emergency contraception)
The hormonal method of emergency contraception is suitable for occasional use. It
involves taking two tablets, each containing ethinyloestradiol 50 micrograms and
levonorgestrel 250 pg, followed 12 hr later by a further two tablets. The method
has only been established as effective if the first dose is taken within 72 hr of the

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES

441

unprotected intercourse. It is less effective than insertion of an intrauterine device
and should not be used as a routine method of contraception (1).
IV. A NEW DEVICE
A new contraceptive system (Persona, Unipath) has recently been launched in the
UK. Persona tells a woman whether she is safe to have unprotected sexual intercourse without conceiving, by identifying her fertile period. The device consists of
a small computerized monitor and disposable urine test sticks. The monitor displays
a green light on the safe days and a red light when she is at risk of becoming
pregnant. The test stick performs a dual immunochromatographic assay on: (i)
oestrone-3-glucuronide (E3G), a major urinary metabolite of oestradiol, which
peaks on average 24 hr before ovulation; (ii) luteinising hormone (LH), which
surges around the time of ovulation and is used by the monitor to determine the
end of the fertile period (current ovulation prediction tests detect this LH surge
but do not measure E3G). In making its calculations the monitor notes the womans
own test stick readings, stores data about her cycle length, and data compiled from
thousands of menstrual cycles (gained from Unipath studies and other literature).
The device is claimed to be 93-95% reliable (9).

V. INTERACTIONS
Oral contraceptives may enhance or antagonize the pharmacological action of drugs
used concurrently. Conversely, drugs that are inducers of P450 metabolic enzymes
(e.g. carbamazepine, ethosuximide, griseofulvin, oxcarbamazepine, phenytoin,
phenobarbitone, primidone, topiramate, and especially rifabutin and rifampicin)
may augment metabolic degradation of the oral contraceptives and possibly reduce
their efficacy.
Additional contraceptive precautions should be taken whilst taking the enzymeinducing drug and for at least 7 days after stopping it. Note: rifampicin regularly
results in menstrual irregularities and occasionally in unintended pregnancies. It is
such a potent enzyme-inducing drug that an alternative method of contraception
(such as an IUD) is always recommended. Even if a course of rifampicin lasts for
less than 7 days, the additional contraceptive precautions should be continued for
at least 4 weeks after stopping the rifampicin (1).
Menstrual irregularities and pregnancies have been reported (10) in women taking
griseofulvin and oral contraceptives concurrently and more studies are required to
confirm the validity of this interactions and the mechanism(s) involved.
Several cases of unintended pregnancy have been reported following the use of
tetracyclines and there is sufficient evidence to warrant the use of other forms of
contraception during the use of these antibiotics (11).
Some broad-spectrum antibiotics (e.g. ampicillin) may reduce the efficacy of
combined oral contraceptives by impairing the bacterial flora responsible for recycling of ethinyloestradiol from the large bowel (12). Although up to 1985 there had

442

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

been 32 reports of unintended pregnancies in women receiving penicillins (25 of
them with ampicillin) the ability of antibacterials to inhibit oral contraceptive efficacy remains controversial (12, 13). The evidence is, however, consistent with the
supposition that efficacy is occasionally impaired. Some studies have pointed to
interference with intestinal flora involved in enterohepatic circulation of oestrogens
as being a likely mechanism for this interaction, and it would be prudent for women
to take additional contraceptive precautions whilst taking a short course of a broadspectrum antibiotic and for 7 days after stopping. If the course of antibiotics exceeds
2 weeks, resistance to this interference develops and additional precautions become
unnecessary (1).
The efficacy of progestogen-only is not affected by broad-spectrum antibiotics
but it is reduced by enzyme-inducing drugs (1).
Examples of actual or potentially clinically important interactions involving oral
contraceptives are detailed in the following Table of Drug Interactions. For convenience this is divided into three parts: (i) those interactions which reduce contraceptive efficacy; (ii) interactions by which oral contraceptives modify the effects of
concomitant medication, and (iii) those interactions which may potentiate the side
effects of oral contraceptives.
1. Interactions which Reduce Oral Contraceptive Efficacy (See reviews 14-17)
Cornbination

Interaction

Oral contraceptive/
broad-spectrum
antibiotic or
antimicrobial agent

Pregnancies were reported in women taking OCs who
were also given ampicillin (18). Animal studies have
shown that broad-spectrum antibiotics do reduce the
enterohepatic circulation of OCs and these changes can
be correlated with changes in the gastrointestinal flora
(12). Reports of contraceptive failure in women given
broad-spectrum antibiotics have been received by the
Committee on Safety of Medicines in Britain (13).

AmpiciI1in

A study investigating the efficacy of an %day ampicillin
treatment in seven women taking OCs failed to show
any effect on plasma concentrations of
ethinyloestradiol, levonorgestrel, norethisterone, FSH
and progesterone when compared with control data
from the same women (13). A further study on six
women, each taking long-term OCs likewise failed to
demonstrate any effect of ampicillin (given from days
9-16 of the contraceptive cycle) in any of the
parameters measured in the first study (13). In spite of
the early reports that ampicillin reduced the efficacy of
OCs, this interaction has not been confirmed in control

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES

Combination

443

Interaction

studies. Possibly other factors (e.g. ampicillin-induced
diarrhoea) may have been responsible for the apparent
interaction.
Griseofulvin

Fluconazole
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole

By 1984, the Netherlands Centre for Monitoring of
Adverse Reactions to Drugs and the British
Committee on Safety of Medicines has received 22
reports of a possible interaction between griseofulvin
and OCs (10). There were 15 cases of intermenstrual
bleeding, five cases of amenorrhoea and two
unintended pregnancies. The proposed mechanism of
interaction is that griseofulvin induced liver enzymes
which consequently lowered oestrogen concentrations
to below effective levels. It should be noted that
griseofulvin is embryotoxic and teratogenic in rats and
that it is contraindicated in pregnancy. There have
been anecdotal reports of contraceptive failure with
fluconazole, itraconazole and ketoconazole. Additional
contraceptive measures should be considered in women
using both agents concurrently.

Tetracyclines (11)
Rifampicin (20-23)

Available evidence suggest that other antibiotics (e.g.
tetracyclines) may be associated with break-through
bleeding or failure of contraception (e.g. rifampicin).
Women taking low-dose oestrogen combined oral
contraceptives should take extra precautions against
conceiving in any cycle in which antibiotics are given.
Increasing the dose of the combined-type oral
contraceptive is not recommended since this will
increase the dosage of oestogen and increase the risk
of a thromboembolic disorder.

Oral contraceptive/
anticonvulsant

Oral contraceptive failure and breakthrough bleeding
have been reported in numerous cases during periods
of concurrent anti-epileptic therapy. Phenytoin,
phenobarbitone, primidone, carbamazepine,
oxcarbamazepine and ethosuximide have all been
implicated. These drugs increase clearance of of oral
contraceptives by enzyme induction so decreasing their
efficacy.
OCs should be used with caution by women with a
history of epilepsy. Of 41 epileptic women taking oral

444

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Oral contraceptive/
anticonvulsant cont.

Interaction

contraceptives and phenytoin or phenobarbitone (or
both) for a total of 955 months, three became
pregnant. There were no pregnacies in the control
group of 41 women taking OCs but not anticonvulsants
for a total of 2278 months. Liver enzyme induction was
incriminated in this interaction (24). Combined oral
contraceptives may cause fluid retention and so
precipitate seizures in epileptics. Cases of exacerbation
of epilepsy by OCs have been reported (20, 24-26).
OCs may also evoke phenytoin toxicity since steadystate plasma phenytoin concentrations in 40 oral
contraceptive users were higher relative to phenytoin
dose than in 135 age-matched non-users of OCs (27).
The use of this combination has to be carefuly assessed
with respect to possible failure of contraception and
increased incidence of fits. Paradoxically serum
phenytoin concentrations may be raised to toxic levels.
Whenever possible it would be better to advise
alternative methods of contraception.

2. Interactions by which OCs Modify the Effects of Concomitant Medication
Oral contraceptive/
anticoagulant

No patient who requires anticoagulants should use oral
contraceptives since OCs increase the synthesis of
specific blood coagulation factors (28) and may impair
the efficacy of anticoagulant therapy.
The thromboembolic potential of OCs may impair the
efficacy of anticoagulant therapy. This is of importance
in anticoagulating women with deep vein thrombosis
caused by taking OCs, since higher doses of
anticoagulants may be required for some days even
after stopping OCs.
Paradoxically, although the effects of dicoumarol were
reduced by OCs (29), there have been reports of
potentiation of the action of nicoumalone by OC use
(15, 30). OCs have also increased the clearance of
phenprocoumon without altering its anticoagulant
effect (31).
There has been much published about the influence of
OC therapy on thromboembolic disorders in women;

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES

Combination

445

Interaction

this is relevant to the understanding of the importance
this interaction, A brief account of this influence is
given below.
The Oxford Family Planning Association contraceptive
study reported on 105 women suffering a first attack of
venous thromboembolism unassociated with pregnancy
or the puerperium (32).
In 71 women suffering thromboembolism unassociated
with surgery, there was a strong association between
current oral contraceptive use and and certain or
probable thromboembolism (relative risk 7.2). A
weaker association with possible thromboembolism
(relative risk 3.1) was found and little or no association
with venous thromboembolism (relative risk 1.4).
There was no significant association between risk and
duration of usage. In current users of OCs containing
50 pg or more of oestrogen, 20 cases of certain or
probable thromboembolism occurred during 32 082
woman-years of observation, and in those using
preparations of less than 50 g of oestrogen three cases
during 7606 woman-years. The corresponding figures
for possible thromboembolism were nine and zero
cases, respectively. Possible thromboembolism
occurred in only one patient receiving a progestogenonly peparation.
Analysis of the data on the 34 cases of post-operative
thromoboembolism showed a difference between the
incidence of thromboembolism in those using OCs
during the month before surgery (12 out of 1244) and
those who had not used OCs (22 out of 4359);
although this difference was not significant. The
findings of this study were consistent with the view that
the risk of thromboembolism is lower with OCs
containing less than 50 pg of oestrogen, although the
data available were too few to confirm this. Further
studies have been done to clarify this point (33-35),
and they have suggested that the relative risk of
developing thromboembolic disorders was increased in
OC users even those taking low oestrogen
preparations, although high oestrogen users were at a
greater risk than those taking low oestrogen OCs.
Women with the factor V Leiden mutation, a

446

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Oral contraceptive/
anticoagulant cont.

heriditary abnormality which results in resistance to
the anticoagulant effect of protein C, were at greater
risk of developing venous thrombosis when taking OCs
than were control subjects (35).
The Committee on Safety of Medicines in the UK has
recently announced that there was evidence of an
increased risk of venous thromboembolism with
combined OC preparations containing desogestrel or
gestodene compared with those containing other
progestogens (2). This warning was based on
publications to which the CSM had pre-publication
access and were subsequently confirmed by other
findings (3-7).

Oral contraceptive/
antidiabetic agent

The potential effect of OCs on glucose tolerance are of
particular concern because of the risk that impaired
glucose tolerance will exacerbate their cardiovascular
effects (36). Early studies suggested that the
prevalence of abnormal glucose tolerance in OC users
was increased from about 4 to 35%, but subsequent
studies produced conflicting results possibly due to
failure to discriminate between types and doses of
oestrogen and progestogen used. In one study 81% of
diabetic patients required no change in insulin dosage
when taking OCs, 17% required an increase of 8-20
units, and 2% required 20-40 units more per day (37).
The decrease in glucose tolerance is related to both the
oestrogen and the progestogen content of the OC
preparation. Levonorgestrel is the most potent
progestogen in decreasing glucose tolerance (38),
whereas OCs containing norethisterone are thought
not to decrease glucose tolerance (39). However, a
subsequent study suggested that glucose tolerance
testing may not be the best way of assessing the effects
of OCs on carbohydrate metabolism (40). This study
which also measured insulin and C-peptide production
found that, although levonorgestrel-containing
combined OCs had a greater effect on glucose
tolerance, desogestel- or norethindrone-containing
preparations produced a similar degree of insulin
resistance, suggesting that this depends on the

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES

Combination

447

Interaction

oestrogenic component, and is modified by the
progestogen. Despite these effects, oral contraceptives
do not appear to increase the subsequent risk of
developing type 2 diabetes (41). The use of other
methods of contraception may be required for type 1
diabetic patients. If this is not practical, the patient
should be checked more closely for decreased diabetic
control, and modification of existing insulin therapy
may be required. The risk of cardiovascular
complications and microangiopathic changes may be
increased when OCs are used (37).
Oral contraceptive/
antihypertensive

Cyclopenthiazide
Guanethidine
Methyldopa
ACE inhibitors
P-Blockers
diuretics

Oral contraceptive/
corticosteroid (20)

There is good evidence that women taking combined
oral contraceptives develop higher systolic (3.65.0 mmHg) and diastolic (1.9-2.7 mmHg) blood
pressure than control subjects using intrauterine
contraceptive devices (42-44). It may therefore be
inferred that oral contraceptives could reduce the
effects of antihypertensive medication. This has been
demonstrated with the earlier antihypertensives and
reduced efficacy of cyclopenthiazide, guanethidine and
methyldopa has been reported in patients taking OCs.
This is probably due to contraceptive-induced Na+ and
water retention (20, 45). Oestrogens and combined
oral contraceptives will antagonize the hypotensive
actions of ACE inhibitors, @-blockersand diuretics
(19).
Plasma metoprolol concentrations were increased in
some women taking oral contraceptives (46).
Oral contraceptives may have to be stopped to treat
hypertension adequately.
Oestrogens enhance the anti-inflammatory action of
corticosteroids (47) and also retard the metabolism of
cortisol (hydrocortisone) possibly by its increased
binding to globulin (47). Contraceptive failure has
been reported in women using intrauterine devices and
using corticosteroid therapy (48). There have been
several reports of of enhanced effects of corticosteroids
in women receiving oestrogens or OCs; the dose of
corticosteroid may have to be reduced (16, 48).

448

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Oral contraceptive/folic
acid and vitamin B12

Oral contraceptives impair folate metabolism and
produce some degree of folate depletion, although the
mechanism of this is unclear (49).
Serum and erythrocyte levels of levels of folate are
decreased and the urinary excretion of
formiminoglutamic acid (an intermediary product of
histidine metabolism that requires the reduced form of
folic acid to be further metabolized) increases in
women using OCs, although these levels return to
normal within 3 months of stopping OCs.
Oral contraceptives have also been shown to lower the
serum levels of vitamin BI2, although there is no
evidence of tissue depletion. This is probably due to
lower total vitamin B12 serum binding capacity, rather
than a true deficiency of the vitamin. However,
pernicious anaemia may occur in women of
reproductive age and a low vitamin B12level in woman
taking OCs should not be disregarded until the
possibility of malabsorption has been excluded. Folic
acid therapy (10 mg daily for 3 months) has improved
cervical dysplasia in users of OCs (50).
Since pregnant women are predisposed to the
development of folate deficiency, women who bcome
pregnant shortly after discontinuing the use of OCs
may be at a higher risk and adequate folate
supplements should be taken. In view of the
association between folate deficiency and fetal
abnormality (particularly spina bifida), it would be
prudent to advise all women coming off the pill and
wishing to become pregnant to take folate supplements
(51-53).

Oral contraceptive/
pethidine (meperidine)

Possible increased analgesia and CNS depression due
to inhibition of pethidine’s metabolism. This
combination should be used with extreme care (54,
55)*

Oral contraceptive/
phenothiazines

Combined oral contraceptives may potentiate
phenothiazine-stimulated prolactin secretion resulting
in mammary hypertrophy and galactorrhoea. Other
drugs which are prolactin-secretion stimulators (e.g.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES

Combination

449

Interaction

reserpine, methyldopa and imipramine) may cause
similar potentiation (20, 56, 57).
Oral contraceptive/
miscellaneous drugs
e.g.
benzodiazepines,
xanthines,
analgesics
alcohol

Compounds undergoing oxidative metabolism may
have their plasma concentrations raised by the
inhibitory action of OCs. Conversely, OCs appear to
induce glucuronidation of some drugs thus reducing
their plasma concentrations. Examples are some
benzodiazepines (clearance of chlordiazepoxide,
alprazolam, diazepam and nitrazepam is reduced,
clearance of temazepam is increased), xanthines
(clearance of theophylline and caffeine is reduced),
cyclosporin (clearance is reduced), analgesics
(clearance of salicylic acid, paracetamol and morphine
is increased) and alcohol (clearance is reduced or not
affected) (see reviews (14-17, 58, 59).

3. Interactions which may Potentiate the Side Effects of Oral Contraceptives

Oral
contraceptive/drugs
causing liver enzyme
inhibition

A wide range of drugs are reported (see below) to
cause liver enzyme inhibition. Concomitant
administration with OCs could, theoretically, be
expected to potentiate the actions of OCs by delaying
the hepatic metabolism of both the oestrogen and
progestogen components. This effect could present as
increased side effects (e.g. fluid retention, diabetogenic
and hypertensive effects, or increased risk of
thromboembolic disorders). Such combinations should
be used with care and subjects should be
questioned/monitored at regular intervals for
emergence of known side effects of OCs. Drugs that
could be involved are:
aspirin, allopurinol, chloramphenicol, cimetidine,
cortisol and other corticosteroids, disulfiram, isoniazid,
methandienone, methylphenidate, MA01
antidepressants, para-aminosalicylic acid,
phenothiazines, phenyramidol, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), sulphaphenazole, tricyclic
antidepressants and related compounds, triparanol (23,
60).

450

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

REFERENCES

1 British National Formulary. (1996) No. 32, Chapter 7.3, Contraceptives, British Medical
Association and The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London, p. 336.
2 Rawlins MD. (1995) Letter (Dear DoctorlPharmacist) dated 18th October (1995, Committee on Safety of Medicine, London.
3 WHO. (1995) Lancet 346, 1582.
4 Jick H et al. (1995) Lancet 346, 1589.
5 Bloemenkamp KWM et al. (1995) Lancet 346, 1593.
6 Spitzer WO et al. (1996) Br Med J 312, 83.
7 Lewis MA et al. (1996) Br Med J 312, 88.
8 McPherson K . (1996) Br Med J 312, 69.
9 Anon. (1996) Pharm J 257, 481.
10 Van Dijke CPH, Weber JCP. (1984) Br Med J 288, 1125.
11 Bacon JF, Shenfield GM. (1980) Br Med J 280, 293.
12 Back DJ et al. (1980) J Steroid Biochem 13, 95.
13 Back DJ et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 15, 280P.
14 D’Arcy PF. (1986) Drug Intel1 Clin Pharm 20, 353.
15 Stoehr GP. (1986) Drug Intel1 Clin Pharm 20, 714.
16 Back DJ, Orme MLE. (1990) Clin Pharmacokinet 18, 472.
17 Shenfield GM. (1993) Drug Safety 9, 21.
18 Dossetor J. (1975) Br Med J 4 , 467.
19 British National Formulary. (1996) N o , 32, Appendix 1, British Medical Association and
The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London, p. 550.
20 Oral Contraceptives. (1974) Bulletin, Vol. 5, No. 3, Health Protection Branch, Department of Health and Welfare, Canada.
21 Nocke-Finck L et al. (1973) Dtsch Med Wochenschr 98, 1521.
22 Reimers D. (1974) J A M A 227, 608.
23 Jezequel AM et al. (1971) Gut 12, 984.
24 Janz D , Schmidt D. (1974) Lancet i , 1113.
25 Coulam CB, Annegers JF. (1979) Epilepsia 20, 519.
26 McArthur J. (1967) Br Med J 3 , 162.
27 De Leacy E A et al. (1979) Br J Clin Pharmacol8, 33.
28 Williams JRB. (1986) In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP (eds) Iatrogenic diseases, 3rd edn, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, p. 171.
29 Schrogie JJ et al. (1967) Clin Pharmacol Ther 8 , 670.
30 de Teresa E et al. (1979) Br Med J 2, 1260.
31 Monig H et al. (1990) Br J Clin Pharmacol30, 115.
32 Vessey M et al. (1986) Br Med J 292, 526.
33 Kierkegaard A. (1985) Contraception 31, 29.
34 Helmrich SP et al. (1987) Obstet Gynecol 69, 91.
35 Vandenbroncke JP et al. (1994) Lancet 344, 1453.
36 Taylor R. (1986) Adv Drug React Bull (December), p. 452.
37 Steele JM, Duncan LJP. (1978) J Fam Plann Doctors 2, 48.
38 Perlman JA et al. (1985) J Chron Dis 38, 857.
39 Wynn V. (1982) Am J Obstet Gynecol 142, 739.
40 Godsland IF et al. (1991) J Clin Endocrinol Metab 74, 64.
41 Rimm EB et al. (1992) Diabetologica 35, 967.
42 WHO Task Force on Oral Contraceptives. (1989) Contraception 40, 129.
43 Khaw K-T, Peart WS. (1982) Br Med J 285, 403.
44 Lim KG et al. (1987) Br Med J 294, 1057.
45 McEwan G . (1969) Lancet ii, 594.
46 Kenfall MJ et al. (1982) Br J Clin Pharmacol 14, 120.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES

45 1

47 Spangler AS et al. (1969) J Clin Endocrinol Metab 29, 650.
48 Anon. (1983) Drug Interaction News 3, 48.
49 Lambie DG, Johnson RH. (1985) Drugs 30, 145.
50 Buttenvorth CE Jr et al. (1982) Am J Clin Nutr 35, 73.
51 Smithells RW et al. (1983) Lancet i, 1027.
52 Laurence KM et al. (1981) Br Med J 282, 1509.
53 Winship K et al. (1984) Arch Dis Childh 59, 1052.
54 Crawford JS, Rudofsky S . (1966) Br J Anaesth 38, 446.
55 Crawford JS, Hooi HWY. (1968) Br J Anaesth 40, 723.
56 Shearman RP. (1971) Lancet ii, 64.
57 Fletcher AP. (1986) In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP. (eds) Iatrogenic diseases, 3rd edn, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, p. 382.
58 Brodie MJ. (1983) Prescribersí J 23, 140.
59 Anon. (1985) Drug Interaction News 5 , 7.
60 D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP. (1976) J Fam Plann Doctors 2, 48.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 8
Drug Interactions with Agents Used
in Immunosuppression and Cancer
Chemotherapy

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

8.1 DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH
IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS
Immunosuppressants are used to prolong the survival of organ transplants by suppression of rejection processes. The major immunosuppressants are cyclosporin,
azathioprine and tacrolimus. These agents are also used as immunosuppressants in
autoimmune disorders. In addition, the following antineoplastic agents that possess
immunosuppressant properties are also used in a variety of autoimmune disorders
including those conditions affecting the skin, kidneys and joints: actinomycin D,
chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, cytarabine, daunorubicin, doxorubicin, fluorouracil, hydroxyurea, melphalan, mercaptopurine, methotrexate, mustine, razoxane
and thiotepa. These agents may be given in association with corticosteroids, the
other main group of immunosuppressants, to permit a reduction in the dose level
of corticosteroids that would be required were they used alone. The neoplastic
agents are also used in conditions refractory to corticosteroids and other therapy.
The following chapter is selective in that it only deals with interactions involving
the three main immunosuppressants. Interactions with antineoplastic agents and
corticosteroids are dealt with in other chapters.

I. AZATHIOPRINE
Azathioprine is an immunosuppressant and antineoplastic agent with similar actions
to those of mercaptopurine to which it is slowly metabolized. It is given by mouth
or by slow intravenous injection (well diluted) as the sodium salt. Blood counts
should be carried out regularly during treatment and azathioprine should be withdrawn or the dosage reduced at the first indication of bone marrow depression. It
should be used with care in patients with liver damage or a history of liver disease.
Reduced doses may be required in patients with impaired renal function. Its dosage
and duration of use may vary according to the condition, its severity and the clinical
response obtained. Cessation of therapy, even after a period of years, carries a high
risk of transplant rejection within a few weeks. It should be used with caution in
patients receiving, or who have recently received, other drugs which suppress bone
marrow function.
In addition to its role as an antineoplastic agent and in the prevention of transplant
rejection, azathioprine is used in the treatment of patients with ulcerative colitis at
doses of 2mg/kg/day that have not been controlled by salazopyrine type agents
alone, e.g. mesalazine or olsalazine. Azathioprine is also used in severe rheumatoid
arthritis at doses of 1.5-2.5 mg/kg/day in divided doses. In immunosuppressant
therapy in systemic lupus erythematosus and polymyositis, when azathioprine is

455

456

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

used, it is usual to combine its use with chlorambucil. In the treatment of psoriatic
arthritis there is the clinical belief that azathioprine is more effective for the arthritic
element and methotrexate for the dermatological manifestations.
In myasthenia gravis where thymectomy is not advisable immunosuppression with
corticosteroids (prednisolone 100 mg daily initially) may be given. Since high doses
of steroids may be necessary the addition of azathioprine 2mg/kg daily may have
a major corticosteroid-sparing effect.
There is clinical evidence that azathioprine antagonizes the effect of non-depolarizing muscle-relaxants (e .g. atracurium, d-tubocurarine, pancuronium, vecuronium). Experimental data confirm that azathioprine reverses the neuromuscular block
caused by d-tubocurarine, and it potentiates the neuromuscular blocking action of
suxamethonium.
The potential teratogenicity of azathioprine should be borne in mind. Although
it has been shown to be teratogenic in laboratory animals, clinical evidence suggests
that the risk is not appreciable in humans. There is no doubt that azathioprine and
its metabolites cross the placenta; many children exposed in utero have now completed the first decade of life without reported problems. It has not been possible
to detect azathioprine or its metabolites in the breast milk of treated patients.
Tablets and injection solutions should be stored below 25°C and protected from
light.

Combination

Interaction

Alkaline solutions/
azathioprine (1)

Azathioprine is metabolized to mercaptopurine at
alkaline pH.
Avoid admixture of azathioprine with any alkaline
solution.

Allopurinol, oxypurinol,
thiopurinoVazathioprine
(2, 3)

Xanthine oxidase activity is inhibited by allopurinol,
oxypurinol and thiopurinol which results in reduced
conversion of biologically active 6-thioinosinic acid to
biologically inactive 6-thiouric acid. The dose of
azathioprine should be reduced to one quarter of the
original dose if given in combination with a xanthine
oxidase inhibitor.

Co-trimoxazole/
azathioprine (4)

Haematological toxicity (bone marrow suppression) of
co-tnmoxazole is increased by accompanying
immunosuppression with azathioprine, especially when
co-trimoxazole is used in prophylaxis rather than in
treatment of infection.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS

457

Combination

Interaction

Frusemide/azathioprine

Frusemide impairs the metabolism of azathioprine by
human hepatic tissue in vitro. The significance of this
clinically is uncertain.

(3)

Neuromuscular blocking
agentdazathioprine
(3, 5 , 6)

Azathioprine potentiates the neuromuscular blockade
produced by depolarizing agents such as
succinylcholine and can reduce the blockade produced
by non-depolarizing agents such as atracurium,
vecuronium, pancuronium, and tubocurarine. There is
considerable variation in the potency of this
interaction.

Myelo suppressive
agents/
azathioprine (3)

A number of therapeutic agents have myelosuppressive
effects, e.g. antineoplastic agents, cimetidine,
co-trimoxazole, indomethacin, penicillamine
sulphonamides, etc. These effects are more common
and more pronounced in patients concomitantly
treated with azathioprine.

Rifampicidazathioprine
(7)

Rifampicin reduces the efficacy of azathioprine in
rejection of transplanted organs.

Sulphasalazine/
azathioprine (8, 11)

Thiopurine drugs, such as azathioprine and 6mercaptopurine, are used in the treatment of
inflammatory bowel disease, as are sulphasalazine
(salazopyrine) and its metabolite 5-amino salicylic acid.
S-Methylation catalyzed by thiopurine methyl
transferase (TPMT) is a major pathway in the
metabolism of thiopurines. Non-competitive inhibition
of thiopurine methyl transferase by sulphasalazine has
been demonstrated. Individuals with genetically low
levels of TPMT are at greatly increased risk of
potentially life-threatening thiopurine toxicity such as
myelosuppression when treated with standard doses of
both drugs.

Vaccines/azathioprine
(3)

The immunosuppressive activity of azathioprine could
result in atypical and life-threatening infections in
response to live vaccines. Killed vaccines are likely to
be ineffective when given to patients on azathioprine.
Hepatitis B vaccine being a case in point.

458

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Warfaridazathioprine
(3, 12)

Interaction

Inhibition of the anticoagulant effect of warfarin in
azathioprine-treated patients has been reported (3).
Severe bleeding occurred in a patient on long-term
warfarin treatment after discontinuing azathioprine.

11. CYCLOSPORIN

Cyclosporin is a fungal metabolite, it is a cyclic polypeptide consisting of 11 amino
acids. It is a potent immunosuppressive agent which prolongs the survival of allogenic transplants involving skin, heart, pancreas, bone marrow, kidney, lung, etc. It
appears to block the resting lymphocytes in the Go or early GI phase of the cell
cycle and also inhibits lymphokine production and release, including interleukin 2
(T-cell growth factor, TCGF). The available evidence suggests that cyclosporin acts
specifically and reversibly on lymphocytes. It does not depress haemopoeisis and
has no effect on the function of phagocytic cells.
Cyclosporin is extensively metabolized by the liver. Metabolism is thought to
proceed via the cytochrome P450 system, primarily by mono- and dihydroxylation
as well as by N-demethylation. The major route of elimination is biliary and most
of the drug is excreted in the bile as metabolites. Only trace amounts of cyclosporin
and its metabolites are eliminated in the urine.
Interactions with other drugs generally arise from effects on the pharmacokinetics
of cyclosporin (increased or decreased cyclosporin blood levels), or from additive
pharmacological or toxicological effects resulting in nephrotoxicity andor hepatotoxicity (see reviews by Cockburn (13), Ptachcinski et al. (14) and Whiting et al.
(15).
Listed below in the Drug Interaction Tables are those drugs which have been
reported to interact in some way with cyclosporin. The commonest hazards of
such interactions are raised cyclosporin blood levels (danger of nephrotoxicity and
hepatotoxicity) and decreased cyclosporin blood levels (danger of transplant rejection). Management of these interactions (assuming that the interacting drug must
be continued) will depend on adjusting cyclosporin dosage with specific monitoring
of renal function. The list of interactions is divided into those which are well
substantiated by clinical reports, those which are based on isolated reports which
have yet to be substantiated or refuted, and those which have the potential to cause
an interaction, but for which no published cases have arisen. Relevant results from
animal studies have also been cited.
The extent of a given interaction and its clinical significance will be variable and
may depend upon numerous other factors such as the patient’s condition, drug
dosage and mode of administration. In most cases, because of the nature of the
combined drugs, concomitant administration would not be contraindicated and
indeed may be unavoidable. Consideration should therefore be given to the poten-

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS

459

tial for interaction in such cases. Routine monitoring of cyclosporin blood levels
should always be conducted and dosage adjustments instituted whenever necessary.
Animal studies indicate that cyclosporin is not teratogenic. However, as the
safety of cyclosporin in human pregnancy has not been fully established it should,
therefore, only be used if the benefit outweighs any potential risk. Cyclosporin
passes into breast milk and the manufacturers recommend that mothers receiving
treatment with cyclosporin should not breast feed their infants.
Cyclosporin (Sandimmun is presented as an oral solution (100mg/ml) and as a
concentrate for intravenous infusion. The latter concentrate (50 mg/ml) contains
650 mg/ml polyethoxylated castor oil and 33% ethanol by volume. This formulation
should therefore not be used in patients known to be hypersensitive to polyethoxylated caster oils (Cremophor EL). The alcohol content of the formulation may also
be anticipated to present a hazard to patients being treated with disulfiram (Antabuse) or other drugs which have an antabuse-like reaction with alcohol.
Once an ampoule of the concentrated formulation is opened the contents should
be used immediately; diluted infusion solutions should be discarded after 24 hr. The
oral solution should be used within 2 months of opening the bottle. Refrigeration
of the oral solution is not recommended as this may result in precipitation of
cyclosporin.
1. Drugs Increasing Serum Cyclosporin Levels (danger of nephrotoxicity)

a. Well-substantiated interactions
Corticosteroids (16)
e.g. methyl prednisolone (17-21)
prednisolone (21)
prednisone (22-24)
Calcium channel blocker
e.g. diltiazem (16, 25-28)
nicardapine (16, 52)
verapamil (16, 61, 62)
doxycycline (13-16)
erythromycin (16, 29-39)
fluconazole (16)
itraconazole (16)
ketoconazole (16, 40-49)
norethisterone (50-51)
omeprazole (7)
Oral contraceptives (51)

b. Isolated reports of interactions
acyclovir (15, 53)
amiodarone (7)

460

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

ceftazidime (54, 55)
cimetidine (56-60)
clotrimazole (14)
co-trimoxazole (67-69)
danazol (50, 69)
diltiazem (63)
frusemide (77, 78)
guanfacine (70)
imipenem (72)
latamoxef sodium (73)
methyl testosterone (74)
norfloxacin (64)
propafenone (7)
ranitidine (75-76)
thiazide diuretics (13, 15)
warfarin (13)
2. Drugs Decreasing Serum Cyclosporin Levels (danger of transplant rejection)
carbamazepine (16, 79)
isoniazid (24, 80-82)
phenobarbitone (16, 83-88)
phenytoin (16, 57, 89-92)
primidone (13, 73)
rifampicin (16, 80-82, 93-100)
sodium valproate (101)
sulphonamide/trimethoprim combinations (102, 103)
sulphinpyrazone (104)

3. Drugs Enhancing Cyclosporin’s Nephrotoxic Potential
acetazolamide (65)
acyclovir (51)
aminoglycosides (105-110)
amphotericin (111-113)
captopril (13, 114)
cephalosporins (106, 107)
e.g. cefotaxime (56)
cefuroxime (56)
cephradine (56)
cimetidine (57-59)
colchicine (7)
etoposide (115)
frusemide (77, 78, 116)
indomethacin (14, 117)

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS

461

melphalan (44, 118-120)
metolazone (121)
non-steroidal anti-inflammatorydrugs (NSAIDs) (14, 66, 117, 122)
ranitidine (58, 76, 123)
sulphonamides/co-trimoxazole(67, 68, 124)
trimethoprim (67, 102, 124)
vancomycin (125)

4. Other Interactions with Cyclosporin
Combination

Interaction

Digoxidcyclosporin (13)

Increased levels of plasma digoxin in patients receiving
combination.

Diureticsk yclosporin
(15)

Possible hyperkalaemia with potassium sparing
diuretics or with K+ supplement.

Fluoxetinekyclosporin
(126)

Horton and Bonser (126) reported an interaction
between cyclosporin and fluoxetine causing a rise in
blood cyclosporin concentrations. Their patient, a 59year-old man, underwent cardiac transplantation for
end stage heart failure. Cyclosporin was given as an
immunosuppressant, and he was maintained on 225 mg
twice daily with a stable trough whole blood
concentration of 300 p,g/l. Seventeen days postoperatively, the patient developed an acute depressive
illness and was given the serotonin re-uptake inhibitor
antidepressant, fluoxetine 20 mg once daily. No other
changes were made to his drug treatment.
After 10 days his cyclosporin concentration had risen
to 588 p,g/l and the dose of cyclosporin was reduced to
75 mg twice daily. Cyclosporin blood concentration
then remained at 250 p,g/l. He did not respond to
fluoxetine, so the drug was stopped. After 7 days his
cyclosporin concentration had fallen to 95 pg/l,
necessitating a dose increase of cyclosporin to 200 mg
twice daily. His blood cyclosporin concentration then
remained at 300 p,g/l. Hepatic and renal functions were
normal throughout.

Grapefruit
juicekyclosporin
(127-130)

The flavonoids in grapefruit juice inhibit the
breakdown of cyclosporin and increase the steady state
blood levels.

462

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Lipid lowering agents/
cyclosporin (7)

Increased risk of myopathy with pravastatin and
simvastatin.

Nifedipinekyclosporin
(131, 132)

Psoriatic patients receiving nifedipine together with
cyclosporin showed evidence of nifedipine toxicity
(severe flushing, burning sensation, rash) (131).
Cyclosporin was shown to compete with nifedipine for
a common metabolic enzyme (132) cytochrome P450
which reduced the metabolism of nifedipine.

Neuromuscular blocking
agentdcyclosporin
e.g. atracurium and
vecuronium (133)

Increased neuromuscular blockade.

Prednisolonekyclosporin
(21, 134-140)

Increased prednisolone levels due to decreased hepatic
metabolizing activity (cyclosporin inhibits liver
enzymes). There is a mutual interaction in that
cyclosporin blood levels are also increased.
Small doses of corticosteroids are used with advantage
in cyclosporin treatment; however, Cushingoid
symptoms have commonly been reported, as has also
impaired glucose metabolism in pancreas graft
recipients. Prednisolone dosage should be kept at the
minimal effective level.

Vaccineskyclosporin
(141-146)

With killed vaccines there is reduced efficacy of the
vaccine due to immunosuppression. With live vaccines
there is a significant risk of severe infection.
Prospective cyclosporin therapy warrants assessment of
each patient’s immune protection against infectious
diseases preventable with vaccines or toxoids.

TACROLIMUS
Tacrolimus is isolated from Streptomyces tsukubaensis and has a 23-member macrolide lactone structure with a hemiketal-masked a-P diketoamide function. It is used
as an immunosuppressant in transplantation and in various immunological diseases.
Tacrolimus has a low and variable bioavailability and is mainly excreted in the

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS

463

bile following metabolism. The drug has a low therapeutic index and its use is
mainly limited by its intrinsic nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity.
The Committee on Safety of Medicines (147) drew attention to Atkinson et al.
(148) who reported five cases of cardiomyopathy in children who received tacrolimus
after liver or kidney transplantation. The CSM point out that in those cases where
blood levels are known the recommended level of tacrolimus of 25 kg/ml had been
exceeded.
Cardiomyopathy associated with tacrolimus appears to be reversible on dose
reduction or drug withdrawal.
In the liver and small intestine, tacrolimus is mainly metabolized by enzymes of
the cytochrome P450 (CYP)3A sub family to at least eight demethylated andor
hydroxylated metabolites.
Anecdotal in vivo drug interactions involving known CYP3A substrates/or inhibitors in patients who have received liver transplantation have been reported (150)
which have given rise to increased plasma levels of tacrolimus. In a comprehensive
study (149) using 34 different drugs Christians et al. (1996) studied their potential
for interaction with tacrolimus metabolism using human liver microsomes.

Drugs Which Have Been Shown to Inhibit Tacrolimus Metabolism
In vivo (150)

In vitro (149)

clotrimazole (151)
corticosteroids
ketoconazole
diltiazem
erythromycin (152, 153)

bromocriptine
corticosteroids
dexamethasone
ergotamine
ethinyloestradiol
josamycin
ketoconazole
miconazole
midazolam
nifedipine
omeprazole
tamoxifen
troleandomycin
verapamil

REFERENCES

1 Door RT, Fritz WL. (1980) Cancer Chemotherapy Handbook, Elsevier, New York, p.
247.
2 Muggia FM et al. (1967) Arch Zntern Med 120, 12.
3 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1189-1191 (azathioprine).

464

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

4 Bradley PP et al. (1980) A n n Intern Med 93, 560.
5 Dretchen KL et al. (1976) Anaesthesiology 45, 604.
6 Gramstad L. (1987) Br J Anaesth 59, 995.
7 British National Formulary. (March 1996) No. 31, Appendix 1. British Medical Association and The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London.
8 Szumlanski CL, Weinshilboum RM. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 456.
9 Lennard L, Van Loon JA, Weinshilboum RM. (1989) Clin Pharmacol Ther 46, 149.
10 Evans WE et al. (1991) J Pediatr 119, 985.
11 Schutz E et al. (1993) Lancet 341, 436.
12 Singleton JD, Coyers L. (1992) A m e r J Med 92, 217.
13 Cockburn I. (1986) Transplant Proc 18 (6 Suppl5), 50.
14 Ptachcinski RJ et al. (1986) Clin Pharmacokinet 11, 107.
15 Whiting PH et al. (1986) Transplant Proc 18 (6 Suppl 5), 56.
16 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1530-1534 (cyclosporin).
17 Boogaerts MA et al. (1982) Lancet ii, 1216.
18 Durrant S et al. (1982) Lancet ii, 829.
19 Klintmalm G , Sawe J. (1984) Lancet i , 731.
20 Klintmalm G et al. (1985) Transplantation 39, 132.
21 Ost L et al. (1985) Transplant Proc 17, 1252.
22 Caine RY. (1980) Nephron 26, 57.
23 European Multicentre Trial Group. (1983) Lancet ii, 986.
24 Langhoff E , Madsen S. (1983) Lancet ii, 1031.
25 Grino JM et al. (1986) Lancet i , 1387.
26 Neumayer HH, Wagner K. (1986) Lancet ii, 523.
27 Pochet JM, Pirson Y. (1986) Lancet i , 979.
28 Wagner K et al. (1986) Transplant Proc 18, 510.
29 Hourmant L et al. (1985) Transplant Proc l?, 2723.
30 Ptachcinski RJ et al. (1985) N Engl J Med 313, 1416.
31 Freeman DJ et al. (1986) Clin Pharmacol Ther 39, 193.
32 Godin JR et al. (1986) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 20, 504.
33 Gonwa TA et al. (1986) Transplantation 41, 797.
34 Grino JM et al. (1986) Ann Intern Med 105, 467.
35 Kessler M et al. (1986) Eur J Clin Pharmacol30, 633.
36 Kohan DE. (1986) N Engl J Med 314, 448.
37 Martell R et al. (1986) Ann Zntern Med 104, 660.
38 Venuto RC et al. (1986) Kidney Int 29, 438.
39 Wadhwa N et al. (1986) Clin Res 34, 638A.
40 Cunningham C et al. (1982) Lancet ii, 1464.
41 Daneshmend TK. (1982) Lancet ii, 1342.
42 Dieperink H, Moller J. (1982) Lancet ii, 1217.
43 Ferguson RM et al. (1982) Lancet ii, 882.
44 Morgenstern G R et al. (1982) Lancet ii, 1342.
45 Ferguson RM, Fidelus-Gort R (1983) Transplant Proc 15, 2350.
46 Smith J et al. (1983) Exp Hematol 11 (Suppl 13), 176.
47 White DJ et al. (1984) Transplantation 37, 214.
48 Burke MD, Whiting PH. (1986) Clin Nephrol25 (Suppl l), S111.
49 Shepard JH, Simmons RL. (1986) Clin Pharm 5 , 468.
50 Ross WB et al. (1986) Lancet i , 330.
51 Leimenstoll G et al. (1984) Dtsch Med Wochenschr 109, 1989.
52 Bourbigot B et al. (1986) Lancet i, 1447.
53 Brigden D et al. (1982) Am J Med 73 (lA), 182.
54 De Pauw BE et al. (1984) Krankenhausartz 57, 854.

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS

55 Verhagen C et al. (1986) Blut 53, 333.
56 Wood AJ et al. (1983) Transplant Proc 15, S2409.
57 Freeman DJ et al. (1984) Ann Roy Coll Phys Surg Canada 17, 301.
58 Jarowenko MV et al. (1986) Transplantation 42, 311.
59 Schwass DE et al. (1986) Clin Nephrol25 (Suppl l), S117.
60 DSouza MJ et al. (1988) Drug Metabol Disposit 16, 57.
61 Brannigan J et al. (1988) Kidney Znt 33, 449.
62 Robson RA et al. (1988) Br J Clin Pharmacol25, 402.
63 Sabate I et al. (1989) Transplant Proc 21, 1460.
64 Thomson DJ. (1988) Transplantation 46, 312.
65 Keogh A et al. (1988) Transplantation 46, 478.
66 Harris KP et al. (1988) Transplantation 46, 478.
67 Thompson JF et al. (1983) Transplantation 36, 204.
68 Ringden 0 et al. (1984) Lancet i, 1016.
69 Kimmel PL et al. (1985) Kidney Znt 27, 343.
70 Schroder 0 et al. (1986) Dtsch Med Wochenschr 111, 602.
71 Scholz M et al. (1984) Nieren Hockdruckkr 13, 418.
72 Zazgornik J et al. (1986) Clin Nephrol26, 265.
73 Hansten PD (1984) Drug Interactions Newsletter 4 , 29.
74 Moller BB, Ekelund B. (1985) N Engl J Med 313, 1416.
75 Bailey RR et al. (1985) NZ Med J 98, 915.
76 Hiesse C et al. (1985) Lancet i, 1280.
77 Whiting PH et al. (1984) Biochem Pharmacol33, 1075.
78 Racusen LC et al. (1985) Monogr Appl Toxicol 2 , 419.
79 Lele P et al. (1985) Kidney Znt 27, 344.
80 Kahan BD. (1983) Transplant Proc 15 (4, Suppl 1-2), 2641.
81 Kahan BD. (1983) Transplant Proc 15 (4, Suppl 1-2), 2649.
82 Coward RA et al. (1985) Lancet i, 1342.
83 Wideman CA. (1983) Transplant Proc 15 (4 Suppl 1-2), 3168.
84 Burckart GJ et al. (1984) J Clin Pharmacol24, 412.
85 Cunningham C et al. (1985) Biochem Pharmacol34, 573.
86 Cunningham C et al. (1985) Monogr Appl Toxicol 2, 437.
87 Carstensen H et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol 21, 550.
88 Duncan JI et al. (1986) Transplant Proc 18, 645.
89 Keown PA et al. (1982) Transplant Proc 14, 659.
90 Freeman DJ et al. (1984) Br J Clin Pharmacol 18, 887.
91 Keown PA et al. (1984) Transplantation 38, 304.
92 Whiting PH. (1985) Br Med J 240, 162.
93 Daniels NJ et al. (1984) Lancet ii, 639.
94 Van Buren D et al. (1984) Transplant Proc 16, 1642.
95 Allen RD et al. (1985) Lancet i, 980.
96 Cassidy MJ et al. (1985) Nephvon 41, 207.
97 Howard P et al. (1985) Drug Zntell Clin Pharm 19, 763.
98 Modry DL et al. (1985) Transplantation 39, 313.
99 Offermann G et al. (1985) Am J Nephrol5, 385.
100 Langhoff E, Madsen S (1983) Lancet ii, 1031.
101 Burke JR, Rigby RJ. (1986) Nephron 43, 236.
102 Wallwork J et al. (1983) Lancet i, 366.
103 Jones DK et al. (1986) Br Med J 292, 728.
104 Dossetor JB et al. (1985) Kidney Znt 27, 597.
105 Whiting PH et al. (1982) Br J Exp Pathol63, 554.
106 Whiting PH et al. (1983) Br J Exp Pathol64, 693.
107 Whiting PH et al. (1983) Transplant Proc 15 (4 Suppl 1-2), 2702.

465

466

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

108 Whiting PH, Simpson JG. (1983) Biochem Pharmacol32, 2025.
109 Ryffel B et al. (1986) Clin Nephrol25 (Suppl l ) , S121.
110 Termeer A et al. (1986) Transplantation 42, 220.
111 Gluckman E et al. (1983) Transplant Proc 15 (4, Suppl 1-2), 2628.
112 Kennedy MS et al. (1983) Transplantation 35, 211.
113 Tutschka PJ et al. (1983) Blood 61, 318.
114 Gerkens JF, Smith AJ. (1985) Transplantation 40, 213.
115 Kloke 0, Osieka R. (1985) Klin Wochenschr 63, 1081.
116 Whiting PH et al. (1985) Transplant Proc 17 (4 Suppl 1), 134.
117 Per1 A et al. (1986) Zmmunopharmacology 11, 39.
118 Powles RL et al. (1983) Transplant Proc 15 (4, Suppl 102), 2624.
119 Dale BM et al. (1985) Tranplant Proc 17, 1711.
120 Ptachcinski RJ et al. (1985) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 19, 90.
121 Christensen P, Leski M. (1987) Br Med J 294, 578.
122 Van Rijthoven AWAM et al. (1986) Am Rheum Dis 45, 726.
123 Nott D et al. (1985) Transplant Proc 17, 1289.
124 Nyberg G et al. (1984) Lancet i , 394.
125 Hows JM et al. (1983) Br J Haematol54, 69.
126 Horton RC, Bonser RS (1985) Br Med J 311, 422.
127 Proppe DG et al. (1985) Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 337.
128 Yee GC et al. (1985) Lancet 345, 995-6.
129 Herlitz H et al. (1993) Nephrol Dial Transplant 8 , 375.
130 Ducharme MP et al. (1993) Br J Clin Pharmacol36, 457.
131 McFadden JP et al. (1989) Br Med J 299, 1224.
132 Kronback T. (1988) Clin Pharmacol Ther 43, 630.
133 Gramstadt L et al. (1986) Br J Anaesth 58, 1149.
134 Ringden 0 et al. (1981) Scand J Urol Nephrol64 (Suppl), 220.
135 Gunnarsson R et al. (1983) Lancet ii, 571.
136 Ost L. (1984) Lancet i , 451.
137 Langhoff E et al. (1985) Transplantation 39, 107.
138 Langhoff E et al. (1985) Proc Eur Dial Transplant Assoc 21, 963.
139 Liu T et al. (1985) Transplant Proc 17, 240.
140 Rowles JR et al. (1986) Transplantation 42, 94.
141 Lindsey NJ et al. (1980) Transplant Proc 12, 252.
142 D’Arcy PF. (1985) Pharm Znt 6 , 291.
143 Grabenstein JD, Baker JR. (1985) Drug Intel1 Clin Pharm 19, 679.
144 Versluis DJ et al. (1985) Antiviral Res 5 (Suppl 1), 289.
145 Beyer WEP et al. (1987) Transplant Proc 18, 319.
146 Versluis DJ et al. (1987) Transplant Proc 18, 1348.
147 Committee on Safety of MedicinesNedicines Control Agency. (1995) Curr Problems
21, 6.
148 Atkinson et al. (1995) Lancet 345, 894.
149 Christians U et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol41, 187-190.
150 Peters DH et al. (1983) Drugs 46, 746-794.
151 Mieles L et al. (1991) Transplantation 52, 1086.
152 Schaeffer MS et al. (1994) A n n Pharmacother 28, 280.
153 Gupta SK et al. (1988) Br J Clin Pharmacol 25, 401.

8.2. DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH
ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS
The chemical structures of these agents is very diverse but some form of classification
has been made on the basis of their mode of action or origin. Almost all these
agents are teratogenic or fetotoxic, and almost all the agents cause a greater or
lesser degree of bone marrow suppression, they may also be immunosuppressant
leaving the patient’s resistance to disease, particularly viral infections, impaired.
Most agents have to be administered intravenously and this may give rise to
drug/drug or drug suspension incompatabilities. These have not been dealt with
since there are adequate instructions in the package inserts to enable the doctor or
pharmacist to deal with this problem adequately.
These drugs are in general only suitable for hospital use by specialists in chemotherapy. Special precautions should be observed when handling cytotoxic agents,
these principles are given below.
(1) trained personnel should reconstitute cytotoxics;
(2) reconstitution should be carried out in designated areas;
(3) protective clothing (including gloves) should be worn;
(4) the eyes should be protected and means of first aid should be specified;
( 5 ) pregnant staff should not handle cytotoxics;
(6) adequate care should be taken in the disposal of waste material, including
syringes, containers and absorbent material.
Virtually all cytotoxic agents are locally toxic and seepage from the infusion site
can result in severe tissue necrosis.

GROUP I: ALKYLATING AGENTS
This group of cytotoxic drugs are probably the most widely used in cancer chemotherapy. They act by damaging DNA thus interfering with cell replication. As a
result gametogenesis is often severely affected, also when combined with extensive
radiation is associated with a marked increase in the incidence of acute non-lymphocytic leukaemia.
Regimens that contain an alkylating drug carry the risk of causing permanent
male sterility (there is no effect on potency). Sperm storage before commencing
treatment may be advisable. Females are less severely affected although reproductive life may be shortened by the onset of an early menopause. No increase in fetal

467

468

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

abnormalities or abortion rate has been recorded in patients who remain fertile
after treatment.
Busulphan
Carmustine: can induce progressive pulmonary fibrosis particularly in children (6)
Chlorambucil
Cyclophosphamide
Estramustine
Ethoglucid
Hexamethyl melamine
Ifosfamide: can cause pulmonary fibrosis
Lomustine
Melphalan
Mitobronitol
Mustine hydrochloride
Pipobroman
Thiotepa
Theosulfan
Uramustine

Urothelial toxicity, manifest by haemorrhagic cystitis is a peculiar problem associated
with the use of cyclophosphamide or ifsofamide, is caused by their acrolein metabolite. Mesna reacts specifically with this metabolite in the urinary tract preventing
this aspect of these drugs toxicity.
GROUP 11: CYTOTOXIC ANTIBIOTICS
Many of this diverse group of drugs act as radiomimetics and simultaneous use of
radiotherapy should be avoided as the effects of radiotherapy can be markedly
enhanced.
Aclarubicin
Bleomycin: the principal problem associated with bleomycin use is progressive
pulmonary-fibrosis.
Dactinomycin (actinomycin D)
Daunorubicin
Doxorubicin (adriamycin): common toxic effects are nausea, vomiting, myelosuppression, alopecia, Supraventricular tachycardia may be associated with its usage,
in high doses there may be cumulation and this is associated with the development
of cardiomyopathy, which may manifest itself 1-6 months from initiation of therapy.
Severe cardiac failure can occur without warning.
Epirubicin: blood counts and cardiac function should be carefully monitored during
epirubicin treatment.
Idarubicin

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS

469

Mitomycin
Mitozantrone: mitozantrone can cause congestive heart failure and decreases in left
ventricular ejection fraction.
Plicamycin: the most important form of toxicity associated with the use of plicamycin
consists of a bleeding syndrome which usually begins with an epistaxis. There may
be one or several episodes which usually progress no further. More rarely it may
present with haematemesis. Plicamycin can induce multiple abnormalities in clotting
factors.
GROUP 111: VINCA ALKALOIDS
All have similar activity causing metaphase arrest. All have similar therapeutic
activity but vary in their predominant toxicity. The vinca alkaloids are used to treat
acute leukaemias, lymphomas, and some solid turnours, e.g. breast and lung. The
predominant toxic effect is peripheral and autonomic neuropathy . This side effect
is most obvious with vincristine. The neuropathy is manifest by loss of tendon
reflexes, paraesthesia, abdominal bloating and constipation. Significant motor weakness is a contraindication for the continued use of this class of drug. The incidence
of neuropathy is also dependent on the tumour type being treated (1, 2).
Vincristine sulphate causes virtually no myelosuppression. Its use may be associated
with alopecia and hyponatraemia as a result of stimulating inappropriate ADH
secretion.
Vinblastine sulphate is more myelosuppressive than vincristine but causes less neurotoxicity.
Vindesine sulphate
All three vinca alkaloids are administered intravenously.

GROUP IV: ANTIMETABOLITES
Antimetabolites are incorporated into new nuclear material or combine irreversibly
with cellular enzymes and prevent cell division.
Azathioprine (see also section on immunosuppressive agents).
Cladribine
Cytarabine: a ‘cytarabine syndrome’ has been described. It is characterized by fever,
myalgia, bone pain, chest pain, maculopapular rash, conjunctivitis, and malaise
occurring 6-12 hr after administration. Corticosteroid treatment may be necessary.
Fludarabine phosphate: when used in high doses in acute leukaemia, fludarabine
was associated with severe neurological effects including blindness and death. Rare
cases of haemolytic anaemia have also been reported.
Fluorouracil
Gemcitabine

470

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Mercaptopurine
Methotrexate
Thioguanine
GROUP V: OTHER ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS
Amsacrine: fatal arrhythmias have been reported associated with drug-induced
hypokalaemia. The dose-limiting toxicity, however, is myelosuppression. A few
cases of grand ma1 seizures in patients treated with amsacrine for acute leukaemia
have been reported.
Carboplatin and cisplatin: cisplatin also has an alkylating action. Carboplatin has
similar actions to cisplatin but is better tolerated. The incidence and severity of
nausea, vomiting, nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity and ototoxicity are all less with
carboplatin than cisplatin. Carboplatin is, however, more myelosuppressive.
Crisantaspase is the enzyme asparginase prepared from Erwina chrysanthemi.
Darcarbazine
Ethoglucid
Etoposide
Hydroxyurea
Interleukin 2
Paclitaxel is the first of a new class of drug, the taxanes, and is prepared from the
Pacific yew. It is the first of a class of agents that promote the assembly of microtubules from tubulin dimers and stabilize microtubules by preventing depolymerization.
This stability results in inhibition of the reorganization of the microtubule network
essential for interphase and mitotic cellular functions. In addition, paclitaxel induces
abnormal arrays or bundles of microtubules throughout the cell cycle and multiple
esters of microtubules during mitosis. Routine premedication with a corticosteroid,
an antihistamine, an H2 receptor blocker is recommended to prevent severe hypersensitivity reactions. Other side effects include bone marrow suppression, peripheral
neuropathy, cardiac conduction abnormalities and alopecia. Arthralgia and myalgia
are reported to affect 54% of patients and in 12% are severe (3).

Paclitaxel is formulated with polyethoxylated castor oil which is associated with
anaphylaxis (3).
Pentostatin
Procarbazine
Razoxane
Tamoxifen
COMBINATION CHEMOTHERAPY
Cytostatic or antineoplastic agents are frequently given in treatment schedules which
involve therapy with multiple drugs. This judicious use of triple and quadruple drug

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS

471

therapy in these regimens is probably the major advance in treatment of malignant
disease, particularly in leukoproliferative diseases, in recent years rather than the
introduction of any new single agent. Interactions between different cytostatic or
antineoplastic drugs in multiple therapy will not be discussed in this section, but a
list of the more common multiple regimens is given.

The following regimens,for example, have been used to treat acute leukaemias:
CAMP:
CART:
COAP:
DOAP:
L2 :

OAP:
VAMP:

+

cyclophosphamide methotrexate + mercaptopurine + prednisolone
cytarabine + colaspase + daunorubicin + thioguanine
cyclophosphamide + OAP
daunorubicin + OAP
prednisolone
vincristine daunorubicin for induction, cytarabine
+ thioguanine + colaspase carmustine for consolidation, and thioguanine + cyclophosphamide + hydroxyurea + daunorubicin + methotrexate + carmustine + cytarabine + vincristine for maintenance
vincristine + cytarabine + prednisone
vincristine + methotrexate + mercaptopurine + prednisolone.

+

+
+

Thefollowing regimens,for example,are used for Hodgkinís disease and lymphoma:
COPP:
MOPP:
ABVD:

cyclophosphamide + vincristine + procarbazine + prednisone
mustine + vincristine + procarbazine + prednisone
doxorubicin (adriamycin) , bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine.

Regimens using multiple cytostatic or antineoplastic agents are a highly specialized
therapeutic exercise and their use should be left to experts. The object of the
following table is therefore to draw attention to the fact that other drugs may
interact with these antineoplastic agents.

I. INTERACTIONS WITH ALKYLATING AGENTS
Combination

Busulphadother drugs
causing gynaecomastia (4)
e.g.
digitalis glycosides
et hionamide
griseofulvin
phenothiazines
spironolactone

Interaction

Busulphan causes gynaecomastia; this effect may be
potentiated or additive when this agent is given to
patients receiving other drugs known to cause
gynaecomastia (4).

472

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornb ination

Busulphadthioguanine

(5)

Interaction

The combination of busulphan with thioguanine has
resulted in the development of nodular regenerative
hyperplasia in the liver, portal hypertension and
oesophageal varices ( 5 ) .

Chlorambucil/
phenylbutazone (7)

Animal studies have indicated that patients who
receive phenylbutazone may require a reduction in the
standard dose of chlorambucil because of the
possibility of enhanced chlorambucil toxicity.

Cyclophosphamide/
allopurinol (8, 9, 10)

The Boston Collaborative Drug Surveillance Program
(10) found that in patients with neoplastic disease,
other than leukamia, bone marrow suppression
occurred in 18.8% of cases treated with
cyclophosphamide alone, but in 58.8% of cases treated
with cyclophosphamide plus allopurinol.
Allopurinol potentiates the toxic
effects of cyclophosphamide on bone
marrow.

Cyclophosphamide/
antidiabetic agent (11,
12)

Cyclophosphamide has been reported to be
diabetogenic (ll),and in other reports to depress
blood sugar concentrations (12). It would therefore be
expected to upset the stability of a patient controlled
on insulin or oral hypoglycaemic drugs.

Cyclophosphamide/
skeletal muscle relaxant
(13)

Cyclophosphamide lowers the serum
pseudocholinesterase level and may give rise to
prolonged apnoea if suxamethonium or other
depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug is given.
Check serum pseudocholinesterase level before
anaesthesia. Avoid suxamethonium in such cases.

Ifosfamide/warfarin (14)

Ifosfamide potentiates the effect of warfarin.

Lomustine/theophylline
(9)

The combination of theophylline and lomustine
accelerated the leucopenia and thrombocytopenia
common with this alkylating agent.
Theophylline-induced phosphodiesterase inhibition in
platelets increases intracellular cyclic AMP levels and
may inhibit platelet function.
Oncologists should be alert to the possibility of

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS

Combination

473

Interaction

augmented myelotoxicity and thrombopathia with this
combination.
Melphaladnalidixic acid
(15)

Nalidixic acid together with high dose intravenous
melphalan has caused deaths in children due to
haemorrhagic enterocolitis.

Thiotepdskeletal muscle
relaxant (13)

Thiotepa lowers the serum pseudocholinesterase level
and may give rise to prolonged apnoea if
suxamethonium or other depolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drug is given.
Check levels of pseudocholinesterase in patients on
thiotepa treatment; if levels are low avoid the use of
suxamethonium or other depolarizing neuromuscular
blocking drug. If suxamethonium is necessary in such
cases the anaesthetist should be aware of the risk of
prolonged apnoea.

11. INTERACTIONS WITH CYTOTOXIC ANTIBIOTICS
Bleomyciddivalent and
Bleomycin chelates divalent and trivalent cations
trivalent cations and
(especially copper) and may be precipitated from
various drugs in
solution. Bleomycin is also incompatible with amino
solution (16, 17)
acids, aminophylline, ascorbic acid, dexamethasone,
frusemide (furosemide), riboflavine and agents
containing sulphydryl groups.
Bleomycidnephrotoxic
agents
e.g. cisplatin (18-20)

Enhanced pulmonary toxicity has been reported in
some patients given bleomycin and cisplatin. This has
been attributed to cisplatin-induced impairment of
renal function leading to a decrease in bleomycin
elimination. It seems reasonable to assume that similar
interactions might occur if bleomycin were given with
other nephrotoxic agents.

Dactinomycidcellulose
filters (21-23)

Drug binds to cellulose ester membranes used in some
in-line filters.
Avoid the use of cellulose filters.

474

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

Interaction

Dactinomycidvaccination Vaccination for smallpox or use of other live vaccines
or infection with chickenpox can lead to severe
(22, 24)
generalized disease which is sometimes fatal (24).
Administration of dactinomycin at or about the time of
infection with chickenpox or herpes zoster can cause
severe generalized disease which can be fatal (22).
Daunorubicidheparin
sodium (25)

Daunorubicin has been reported to be incompatible
with heparin sodium in solution.

Doxorubicidaluminiumcontaining apparatus
(26)

Evidence suggests that there is a chemical reaction
(precipitation or colour change) between doxorubicin
hydrochloride injection solutions and the aluminium
hub of a syringe needle.

Doxorubicidheparin
sodium and other drugs
in solution (27)

Doxorubicin has been reported to be incompatible
with solutions of heparin sodium, aminophylline,
cephalothin sodium, dexamethasone, fluorouracil and
hydrocortisone. Store solutions of doxorubicin in
airtight containers at a temperature not exceeding
40°C; protect from light.

Mithramyciddivalent
cations
e.g. Fe2+ (28)

Mithramycin readily chelates with divalent cations
(especially Fe2+).
Avoid this contact especially with solutions containing
trace elements.

111. INTERACTIONS WITH VINCA ALKALOIDS
Combination

Interaction

Vinca alkaloids/
anticonvulsants (29)

Use of combination of anticancer chemotherapy
including vinca alkaloids have been reported to reduce
the blood levels of phenytoin and to increase risk of
seizure.

Vinca alkaloids/
L-asparaginase (29)

When a vinca alkaloid is given with L-asparaginase it
should be given 12-24 hr before the administration of
L-asparaginase in order to minimize toxicity, since

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS

Combination

475

Interaction

L-asparginase reduces the hepatic clearance of
vincristine.
Vinca alkaloids/
mitomycin-C (29)

Acute shortness of breath and severe bronchospasm
have been reported following the administration of
vinca alkaloids. These reactions have been
encountered most frequently when the vinca alkaloids
were used in combination with mitomycin C and may
be serious when there is pre-existing pulmonary
dysfunction. The onset may be within minutes, or
several hours after the vinca alkaloid is injected, and
may occur up to 2 weeks following a dose of
mitomycin C. Progressive dyspnoea may occur.
Vinca alkaloids should not be re-administered.

IV. INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIMETABOLITES
Combination

Interaction

Azathioprine/alkaline
solutions (30)

Azathioprine is metabolized to mercaptopurine at
alkaline pH.
Avoid a mixture of azathioprine with any alkaline
solution.

Azathioprine/allopurinol
(9)

Azathioprine is converted to inactive metabolites by
xanthine oxidase, and this enzyme is inhibited by
allopurinol.
The dose of azathioprine should be reduced if the two
drugs are given together.

Cytarabine/fluorouracil
or methotrexate
(31, 32, 33)

Cytarabine is incompatible with solutions of
fluorouracil or methotrexate. There is evidence that
the latter two agents are also incompatible with each
other in solution. Tumour studies in animals have
shown that methotrexate and cytarabine inhibit the
activity of each other in vivo (33).

Fludarabine/dipyridamole The efficiency of fludarabine is reduced by
dipyridamole .
(34)
Fludarabine/pentostatin
(34)

In a clinical investigation with pentostatin
(deoxycoformycin) for the treatment of refractory

476

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Fludarabine/pentostatin
cont.

chronic lymphatic leukaemia there was an
unacceptably high incidence of fatal pulmonary
toxicity. The combination is not recommended.

FluorouraciYallopurinol
(35)

Concurrent dosage with allopurinol and fluorouracil in
23 patients with advanced cancer enabled i.v. doses of
2 g/m2/day of fluorouracil to be tolerated. The
combination permitted a fourfold increase in steadystate fluorouracil serum levels and in the
‘concentration x time’ exposure to fluorouracil.
Protection by allopurinol was also seen in both
gastrointestinal epithelium and marrow. Allopurinol is
metabolized to oxypurinol which in turn is
a
phosphorylated to l-oxypurinol-5’-monophosphate,
potent inhibitor of orotidylate decarboxylase,
inhibition of which leads to an accumulation of orotic
acid, which in turn inhibits the intracellular conversion
of fluorouracil to either fluorodeoxyuridine
monophosphate or fluorouridine triphosphate, thereby
reducing the toxicity of fluorouracil.
This is an interaction that can be exploited to the
benefit of the patient.

Fluorouracikimetidine
(36, 37)

Pretreatment with cimetidine (1000 mg daily for 4
weeks) increased the bioavailability of oral fluorouracil
by over 70% and of i.v. fluorouracil by 27%, without
evidence of increased toxicity. In contrast to the
previous study (79) cimetidine did not enhance the
absorption of fluorouracil. No increase in toxicity was
noted.

FluorouraciYother drugs
in solution (31, 38)

Fluorouracil is incompatible with the following drugs in
solution; cytarabine, diazepam, doxorubicin and
methotrexate. Solutions of fluorouracil are alkaline and
therefore should not be mixed with acidic agents; e.g.
amino-acids, insulin, multivitamins, penicillin or
tetracyclines.

Mercaptopurinel
allopurinol (9, 39, 40)

Mercaptopurine is converted to inactive metabolites by
xanthine oxidase; this enzyme is inhibited by
allopurinol. The dose of mercaptopurine should be
reduced by 75% if the two drugs are taken together.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS

Combination

477

Interaction

Mercaptopurine/
anticoagulant
e.g. warfarin (39)

The anticoagulant effect of warfarin is reduced when
mercaptopurine is co-administered.

Mercaptopurine/
doxorubicin (41)

Doxorubicin enhances the hepatotoxicity of
mercaptopurine .

Methotrexate/acidic
drugs
aspirin (42-44)
chloramphenicol (42)
phenytoin (42)
probenecid (42, 45)
propionic acid NSAIDS
(42)
sulphinpyrazone (42)
sulphonamide (42, 46,
47)
tetracyclines (42)
thiazide diuretics (42)

Methotrexate is extensively protein bound and may
displace or be displaced by other acid drugs. The
concurrent administration of such drugs will also
decrease the methotrexate transport function of renal
tubules, thereby reducing excretion and increasing
toxicity of methotrexate.

Methotrexate/amiodarone Ulcerated skin lesions developed in a patient
maintained on methotrexate for psoriasis after the
(54)
introduction of amiodarone.
Methotrexate/smallpox
vaccination (48)

After primary vaccination, severe reaction with fever
and vaccinia1 pustules has been described in patients
treated with methotrexate for psoriasis.
Do not vaccinate patients receiving methotrexate with
‘live’ virus vaccines.

Methotrexate/smallpox
vaccination plus
corticosteroids (49)

This combination can be fatal. Smallpox vaccination is
contraindicated. All live vaccines should be avoided in
such patients.

Methotrexate/D-xylose
(46)

Methotrexate has been demonstrated to cause
malabsorption of D-xylose in children with
lymphoblastic leukaemia. The effect is less marked if
the dosage of methotrexate is spaced more widely.

478

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Methotrexate/other
drugs in solution (32)

Methotrexate is incompatible with the following drugs
in solution: cytarabine, fluorouracil and prednisolone
sodium phosphate.

Thioguanine/busulphan
(51)

The combination of busulphan and thioguanine has
resulted in the development of nodular regenerative
hyperplasia, portal hypertension and oesophageal
varices.

Vidarabine/allopurinol
(52)

Severe neurotoxicity resulted from giving vidarabine
treatment to two patients with chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia who suffered herpes simplex or varicella
zoster infections and who were receiving 300 mg
allopurinol daily. The interaction was thought to be
due to allopurinol causing an increase in the vidarabine
metabolite, hypoxanthine arabinoside.

V. INTERACTIONS WITH OTHER ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS
Combination

Interaction

Cisplatidaminoglycoside
antibiotic (1)

There is an increased risk of both nephrotoxicity and
ototoxicity when cisplatin is used concomitantly with
an aminoglycoside antibiotic.

Cisplatidantihypertensive Severe nephrotoxicity was reported in a patient given
and diuretic therapy
cisplatin and antihypertensive therapy of frusemide,
hydralazine,
diazoxide and propranolol. On two
(53)
subsequent occasions the same dose of cisplatin given
alone had no effect on renal function.
Results in animals have shown that frusemide
aggravates cisplatin nephrotoxicity.
Cisplatidithiurn
55, 56)

Cisplatin is reported to alter the proximal tubular
reabsorption of calcium and magnesium. Lithium,
being also reabsorbed in the proximal tubule, is a
likely candidate for drug interaction. The hypothesis
was tested in a 36-year-old woman who was
maintained on lithium carbonate 300 mg four times
daily and required cisplatin for cancer of the tongue.
The lithium dose was kept constant. cisplatin was
given at 100 mg/m2 and followed by i.v. mannitol and

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS

Combination

479

Interaction

fluids. The serum lithium fell from 1.0 to 0.3 mEq/l
during the first course and from 0.8 to 0.5 mEq/l
during the second. These decreases were transient
being reversed in 2 days. The relative contribution of
the cisplatin and the forced diuresis to the presumed
increase in lithium clearance is unknown.
There are theoretical reasons and some clinical
evidence to indicate that serum lithium levels fall when
cisplatin is given. This effect appears to be rapidly
reversed but may be important when high-dose
cisplatin is repeated frequently. Lithium levels should
be carefully monitored under such circumstances.
Cisplatidsodium
bisulphite (57)

Cisplatin reacts chemically with the antioxidant,
sodium bisulphite; cisplatin may be inactivated if
added to solutions containing this antioxidant.

Colaspase/antidiabetic
agent (58-60)

Colaspase causes significant impairment of glucose
tolerance and is diabetogenic (59, 60). It would
therefore be expected to antagonize the actions of
insulin and oral hypoglycaemic drugs.
Use with care in the diabetic patient and check
frequently for continued diabetic control.

Dacarbazine/
hydrocortisone (61)

Dacarbazine is incompatible with hydrocortisone
sodium succinate in solution; it forms an immediate
precipitate.

Ethoglucid/plastic
materials (62)

Concentrated solutions of ethoglucid react with
plastics. Glass syringes should be used for such
solutions.

Interleukin-2/NSAIDs
e.g.
indomethacin (63)
ibuprofen (64)

Administration of indomethacin to patients receiving
interleukin-2 led to severe weight gain, oliguria and
azotaemia. Conversely, ibuprofen has been reported
to reduce interleukin-2 toxicity especially fever, chills,
nausea and vomiting.

Pentostatidallopurinol
(65)

Hypersensitivity vasculitis resulting in death has been
attributed to the use of pentostatin with allopurinol.
The combination is contraindicated.

480

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Procarbazine/alcohol
(66)

Procarbazine inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase and
produces an ‘Antabuse-like’ reaction. Patients should
be warned of the possibility of developing intolerance
to alcohol.

Procarbazine/CNS
acting drugs (66)
e.g.
barbiturates
narcotics (e.g. pethidine
(meperidine))
phenothiazine
derivatives
tricyclic
antidepressants

Procarbazine is a M A 0 1 and therefore interacts with
barbiturates slowing their metabolism and prolonging
their duration of action. The effect of narcotics may
also be prolonged. Combination with phenothiazines
may lead to hypertension and increased extrapyramidal
reactions. Since MAOIs block enzymes normally
metabolizing tricyclic compounds, their combination
may evoke serious reactions.

Combinations of these drugs with procarbazine are
best avoided. Hypertensive crisis, if it occurs, should
be treated with the a-adrenergic blocking drug
phentolamine.
Procarbazine/
sympathomimetic
amines and tyraminecontaining foodstuffs
(66)
e.g.
avocado pears
broad-bean pods
beers
Bovril
canned figs
caviar
unprocessed cheese
(especially
Cheddar and Gruybre)
Chianti wine and sherry
game
liver
New Zealand prickly
spinach
pickled herring
yeast products
(including Marmite)

Procarbazine is a M A 0 1 and therefore interactions
with sympathomimetic amines and with foodstuffs rich
in tyramine may occur as with other MAOIs.
Combination of these amines or foodstuffs with
procarbazine is best avoided. Hypertensive crisis, if it
occurs, should be treated with the a-adrenergicblocking drug phentolamine.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS

481

Combination

Interaction

Tamoxifedallopurinol
(67)

Mild chronic allopurinol hepatitis has been reported to
have been exacerbated by tamoxifen.

Tarnoxifedwarfarin
(68-71)

A marked potentiation of warfarin by tamoxifen has
been reported on a number of occasions. In several
cases the interaction has been life threatening with
increased prothrombin times, haematuria, and
haematoma. Peliosis, hepatis and fatal liver
haemorrhage has been reported in one case who was
receiving both warfarin and a thyroxine-liothyronine
preparation.

VI. GENERAL INTERACTION ISSUES
1. Inappropriate ADH Secretion During Cancer Chemotherapy
Combination

Interaction

Oncological agentlother
drugs affecting ADH
secretion (72)
e.g.
amitriptyline (73)
carbamazepine (74)
chlorpropamide (75-80)
clofibrate (81)
cyclophosphamide (82)
diuretics (83)
fluphenazine (84)
haloperidol (85)
vinblastine (87)
vincristine (88-89)

A drug-induced syndrome of inappropriate secretion of
antidiuretic hormone has been described secondary to
both cyclophosphamide or vincristine therapy or
combinations containing them. There are other reports
of this syndrome complicating chlorpropamide therapy
both in patients with diabetes mellitus (75-77) and in
patients with diabetes insipidus (78-80). The syndrome
has also been described as occurring with amitriptyline,
carbamazepine, clofibrate, diuretics, fluphenazine,
haloperidol, thiothixene, thioridazine and vinblastine.
Combination of any of these drugs might be expected
to increase the likelihood of the syndrome occurring
with resulting water retention and natriuresis.
Treatment with any combination of these drugs should
be used with caution and the syndrome of water
intoxication should be borne in mind when any patient
presents with symptoms of drowsiness, headaches,
anorexia, nausea, vomiting, depression and confusion.

2. Resistance to Antineoplastic Agents
Resistance to antineoplastic agents is one of the greatest limitations to the use of
chemotherapy in malignant disease. Resistance may be intrinsic to the tumour or
acquired during the course of therapy. Much interest has surrounded the discovery

482

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

that certain drugs can modulate or inhibit the mechanisms of resistance. In particular
compounds such as verapamil, quinidine, and cyclosporin which have the ability to
block the p-glycoprotein pump, which acts as an efflux pump for a range of cytotoxic
substances and which is responsible for multi-drug resistance (90, 91).
The classes of drugs which it is claimed have some ability to modulate multi-drug
resistance include: (i) calcium channel blockers including verapamil, nifedipine,
nicardipine; (ii) various phenothiazines, thioxanthines, trifluoperazine, and flupenthixol; (iii) tamoxifen; (iv) cyclosporin; (v) various anti-arrhythmic agents, amiodarone, propranolol, quinidine (92).
REFERENCES

1 British National Formulary (March 1996) No, 31, p. 356, Appendix 1. British Medical
Association and The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London.
2 Watkins SM, Griffin JP. (1978) Br Med J 1, 610.
3 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p. 177
(paclitaxel).
4 AMA Department of Drugs. (1977) A M ADrug Evaluations, 3rd edn, Publishing Sciences
Group Inc, Littleton MA, p. 1119.
5 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1199-1200 (busulphan).
6 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
168-9 (carmustine).
7 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium, (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1195-96 (chlorambucil).
8 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
55 and 761 (cyclophosphamide).
9 Muggia FM et al. (1967) Arch Intern Med 120, 12.
10 Boston Collaborative Drug Surveillance Programe. (1974) JAMA 227, 1036.
11 Pengelly CR. (1965) Br Med J 1, 1312.
12 Kruger HU. (1966) Med Klin 37, 1462.
13 Smith RM Jr et al. (1968) Anesth Analg Curr Res 48, 205.
14 British National Formulary, (March 1996) No, 31, Appendix 1. British Medical Association and The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London.
15 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1180-81 (melphalan).
16 Umezawa H. (1974) Fed Proc 33, 2296.
17 Reynolds JEF. (ed) (1982) Martindale. The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 28th edn, Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 192.
18 Bennett WM et al. (1980) Cancer Treat Rep 64, 921.
19 van Barnevald PWC et al. (1984) Oncology 41, 4.
20 Brodsky A et al. (1989) J Clin Pharmacol29, 821.
21 Kanke M et al. (1983) Am J Hosp Pharm 40, 1323.
22 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p. 605
(dactinomycin).
23 D’Arcy PF. (1983) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 17, 532.
24 AMA Department of Drugs, (1977) A M ADrug Evaluations, 3rd edn, Publishing Sciences
Group Inc, Littleton, MA, p. 1130.
25 Trissel LA. (1977) Handbook on Injectable Drugs, American Society of Hospital Pharmacists, Washington, DC, p. 410.
26 Gardiner WA. (1981) Am J Hosp Pharm 38, 1276.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS

483

27 Dorr RT, Fritz WL. (1980) Cancer Chemotherapy Handbook, Elsevier, New York, p.
390.
28 Dorr RT, Fritz WL. (1980) Cancer Chemotherapy Handbook, Elsevier, New York, p.
543.
29 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p. 520
(vindesine), pp. 351 and 534 (vincristine), pp. 350 and 541 (vinblastine).
30 Dorr RT, Fritz WL. (1980) Cancer Chemotherapy Handbook, Elsevier, New York, p.
247.
31 McRae MP, King JC. (1976) Am J Hosp Pharm 33, 1010.
32 King JC (1978) Am J Hosp Pharm 35, 18.
33 Tattersall MHN et al. (1972) Lancet ii, 1378.
34 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1009 (pudarabine).
35 Howell SB et al. (1981) Cancer 48, 1281.
36 Harvey VJ,et al. (1984) Br J Clin Pharmacol 18, 421.
37 Cohen JL et al. (1974) Cancer Chemother Rep 58, 723.
38 Dorr RT, Fritz WL. (1980) Cancer Chemotherapy Handbook, Elsevier, New York, p.
437.
39 ABPI Data Skeet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
1203 (mercaptopurine).
40 Zimm S. (1983) Clin Pharmacol Ther 34, 810.
41 Reynolds JEF. (ed) (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, pp. 439 and 488.
42 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
340, 791, 1242 (methotrexate).
43 Dixon RL et al. (1965) Fed Proc 24, 454.
44 Brodie BB. (1965) Proc R Soc Med 58, 946.
45 Aherne GW et al. (1978) Br Med J 1, 1097.
46 Dorr RT, Fritz WL. (1980) Cancer Chemotherapy Handbook, Elsevier, New York, p.
526.
47 McIver AK. (1967) Pharm J 199, 205.
48 Allison J. (1968) Lancet ii, 1250.
49 Haim S, Allroy G. (1967) Lancet i, 1165.
50 Craft AW et al. (1977) Br Med J 2, 1511.
51 A B P I Data Skeet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1195 (thioguanine).
52 Friedman HM, Grasela T. (1981) N Engl J Med 304, 423.
53 Markman M, Trump DL. (1983) J Neurooncol 1, 293.
54 Reynold NJ et al. (1989) Br Med J 299, 1980.
55 Bitram JD et al. (1982) Cancer 49, 1784.
56 Pietruska LJ et al. (1985) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 19, 31.
57 Hussain A A et al. (1980) J Pharrn Sci 69, 364.
58 Ohnuma T et al. (1970) Cancer Res 30, 2297.
59 Whitecar JP et al. (1970) Metabolism 19, 581.
60 Gailani S et al. (1971) Clin Pharmacol Ther 12, 487.
61 Dorr RT, Fritz WL. (1980) Cancer Chemotherapy Handbook, Elsevier, New York, p.
363.
62 Lee MG. (1981) Pharm J 227, 651.
63 Sosman J A et al. (1988) J Nut1 Cancer Trust 80, 1451.
64 Eberlein TJ et al. (1989) Arch Surg 124, 542.
65 Steinmetz JC et al. (1989) Am J Med 86, 499.
66 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p. 188
(procarbazine) .

484

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

67 Shah KA et al. (1982) N Y State J Med 82, 1745.
68 Lodwick R et al. (1987) Br Med J 295, 1141.
69 Tenni P et al. (1989) Br Med J 298, 93.
70 Ritchie LD, Grant SMT (1989) Br Med J 298, 1253.
71 Loomus GN et al. (1983) A m J Clin Pathol80, 881.
72 Hamilton DV. (1978) Practitioner 220, 469.
73 Luzecky MH et al. (1974) South Med J 67, 495.
74 Rado JP. (1973) Br Med J 3, 479.
75 Hayes JS, Kaye M. (1972) Am J Med Sci 263, 137.
76 Troyer A de, Demanet JC. (1976) QJ Med 45, 521.
77 Nisbet P. (1977) Br Med J 1, 904.
78 Webster B , Bain J. (1970) J Clin Endocr 30, 215.
79 Cinotti GA et al. (1972) Postgrad Med J 48, 107.
80 Piters K. (1976) J Clin Endocr 43, 1085.
81 Moses AM et al. (1973) J Clin Invest 52, 535.
82 DeFronzo RA et al. (1973) Ann Intern Med 78, 861.
83 Fichman MP et al. (1971) Ann Intern Med 75, 853.
84 Rivera JL de. (1975) Ann Intern Med 82, 811.
85 Matuk F, Kalyanaraman K. (1977) Arch Neurol34, 374.
86 Aijouni K et al. (1974) Arch Intern Med 134, 1103.
87 Ginsberg SJ et al. (1977) N Engl J Med 296, 941.
88 Fine RN et al. (1966) A m J Dis Child 112, 256.
89 Hagen Ga, Frawley TF. (1969) J Lab Clin Med 74, 881.
90 Anon (1989) Lancet ii, 1075.
91 Hochhauser D, Harris AL. (1991) Br Med Bull 47, 178.
92 Ford JM, Hait WN. (1990) Pharmacol Rev 42, 155.

CHAPTER 9
Drug Interactions with Aspirin and Other
Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

9.1. ASPIRIN

INTRODUCTION
The inclusion of a separate table of drug interactions with aspirin (acetylsalicylic
acid) is dictated by the enormous usage of this non-prescription drug alone as an
antipyretic, analgesic and anti-inflammatory agent, or as a component in a wide
spectrum of combination products. A comprehensive list of official and proprietary
aspirin and aspirin-containing preparations is listed in Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edition (1996). The major adverse effects of aspirin are due to its
gastric irritant effects, its interference with platelet function, and in allergic subjects
it produces angioneurotic oedema, urticaria and bronchoconstriction. There is considerable cross-reactivity between aspirin and other NSAIDs especially in these
hypersensitivity reactions.
The use of aspirin in children under the age of 12 years is extremely limited
because of the risk of Reye’s syndrome which is characterized by acute encephalopathy and fatty degeneration of the liver. Several large studies as well as individual
case reports have found an association between Reye’s syndrome and the prior
ingestion of aspirin (1-6). Consequently, the use of aspirin in children as a general
analgesic and antipyretic is no longer considered to be justified. Paracetamol is the
acceptable alternative. Most authorities consider that one of the few acceptable
indications remaining for aspirin in children is in the treatment of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
Aspirin has valuable use as secondary prophylaxis to reduce the risk of myocardial
infarction or cardiovascular events such as stroke in patients at risk.
INTERACTIONS
Some of the effects of aspirin on the gastrointestinal tract are enhanced by alcohol.
Concurrent administration of aspirin and dipyridamole may result in raised peak
plasma salicylate levels and an increased area under the time-concentration curve
(AUC) for the salicylate. Administration of aspirin together with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g. acetazolamide), metoclopramide, or the P-blocker, metoprolol,
may elevate salicylate plasma concentrations to toxic levels. Salicylate concentrations in patients with rheumatoid arthritis may be reduced by concurrent corticosteroids but may be raised to toxic levels if corticosteroids are withdrawn. Antacids
and adsorbents may increase the excretion of aspirin in alkaline urine. Aspirin
may enhance the the activity of coumarin anticoagulants, methotrexate, phenytoin,

487

488

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

sulphonylurea hypoglycaemics, and valproic acid. Aspirin diminishes the effects of
uricosuric agents such as probenecid and sulphinpyrazone. It may diminish the
plasma concentrations of some other NSAIDs, for example fenbufen, indomethacin
and piroxicam. Drug interactions involving aspirin have been reviewed (7) and are
detailed in the following Table of Drug Interactions.
Combination

Interaction

AspiridACE-inhibitor

Aspirin and other NSAIDs have been reported to
reduce or abolish the hypotensive action of ACEinhibitors. It has been proposed that part of the action
of ACE-inhibitors is prostaglandin-dependent which
might explain this interaction with drugs that block
prostaglandin synthesis. The precise mechanism is,
however, uncertain (8-10). The possibility of an
interaction between aspirin and ACE-inhibitors,
especially in patients with heart failure, has been
investigated but data on the interaction are
inconclusive (11).

Aspiridalcohol

Aspirin damages the gastric mucosa and can cause
bleeding; furthermore there is good evidence that
alcohol can increase this blood loss (12, 13). This
interaction is not specific for aspirin and it also occurs
with alcohol and NSAID combinations. The
combination of aspirin and alcohol must clearly be
avoided in any patient who has had a aspirin-induced
gastrointestinal haemorrhage. The impairment of
haemostasis may underlie otherwise unexplained
episodes of bleeding.

Aspiridanticoagulant
(14-16)

Aspirin displaces coumarins from from plasma protein
binding sites and thus potentiates their anticoagulant
action. Aspirin also tends to reduce plasma
prothrombin when taken in large doses. It decreases
platelet adhesiveness and has an ulcerogenic effect
leading to occult bleeding from superficial gastric
erosions; haemorrhage is made worse if anticoagulant
drugs and aspirin are taken together. However,
aspirin-induced blood loss may be reduced by
administering aspirin as an enteric coated or modifiedrelease tablet. Otherwise aspirin should be avoided by
patients taking anticoagulants.

ASPIRIN

489

Combination

Interaction

Aspiridcalcium channel
blocker

The antiplatelet effects of aspirin and calcium-channel
blockers may be increased when they are used
together. There have been isolated reports of disturbed
haemostasis including abnormal bruising, prolonged
bleeding times and ecchymosis (17, 18). The
combination should be used with caution.

Aspiridcorticosteroid
(19, 20)

Corticosteroids decrease the blood salicylate
concentration by increasing the glomerular filtration
rate. Decreasing corticosteroid dose in patients on
aspirin may increase serum salicylate concentrations
and patients should be watched for symptoms of
salicylism. It must be noted that salicylates and
corticosteroids are both ulcerogenic.

Aspiridgriseofulvin

Plasma salicylate concentrations in an 8-year-old child
receiving long-term aspirin therapy for rheumatic heart
disease were markedly reduced when griseofulvin
treatment was started (21). It was suggested that
griseofulvin might interfere with the absorption of
aspirin.

Aspiridinsulin and
hypoglyaemic agents
(22-25)

In vitro studies have shown aspirin to displace
tolbutamide and chlorpropamide from plasma protein
binding thus increasing unbound active sulphonylurea.
The insulin requirement of diabetics can also be
reduced by aspirin.
Cases have been reported where aspirin has
contributed to profound hypoglycaemia in patients on
sulphonylureas, however, in general the interaction
appears to be rare and gives little trouble.

Aspiridmethotrexate
(26, 27)

Methotrexate can be displaced from its plasma protein
binding by salicylates. In addition, salicylates appear to
exhibit renal tubular excretion of methotrexate by
about 35%. This interaction could increase
methotrexate toxicity, See also NSAID/methotrexate
interactions in the following section.

Aspiridother NSAIDs
phenylbutazone

Phenylbutazone inhibits the uricosuria which usually
follows large doses of salicylate (28, 29). In a study
involving four Datients with gout. uricosuria had

490

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Znteraction

Aspiridother NSAIDs
phenylbutazone cont.

followed aspirin 5 g d d a y . Over the next 3-day period,
200, 400 and 600 mg dosages of phenylbutazone caused
the serum level urate level to rise from 4-6 mg/100 ml
(28, 29).

Aspirin/ tenoxicam

Simultaneous administration of high-dose aspirin was
investigated on the pharmacokinetics of single and
multiple doses of tenoxicam on normal subjects (30).
Aspirin caused a 24% drop in the tlI2 value, a 49% rise
in the volume of distribution, and a 98% increase in
the clearance of tenoxicam. Steady-state concentrations
of tenoxicam decreased significantly from 10.4 to 4.5
kg/ml in the presence of chronic, high-dose aspirin.
These effects were consistent with a competitive
protein binding interaction.
Concurrent aspirin caused significant reduction in
plasma tenoxicam concentrations. This result is in
agreement with many studies of the interaction of
other NSAIDs with aspirin (31), and adds weight to
the general view that there is little rationale for the
combination of an NSAID and aspirin in the treatment
of rheumatic diseases.

Aspiridphenytoin
(32-36)

Aspirin displaces phenytoin from binding sites, but
acute interaction of aspirin and phenytoin is unlikely to
be clinically significant because the increased free
phenytoin level is compensated by increased
availability of the drug for metabolic pathways and
more rapid clearance. The overall result of the
interaction is a decrease in the serum level of total
(free plus bound) phenytoin with little change in the
free drug level. There could be complications if the
interaction occurred in a patient treated chronically
with the aspirin-phenytoin combination. The
interaction might then interfere not only with the
plasma protein binding but also with drug metabolism.
Normally, however, the interaction does not
necessitate modification of phenytoin dosage.

ASPIRIN

Combination

491

Interaction

Aspiridprobenecid
(28, 29, 37-39)
Sulphinpyrazone
(28, 38, 40, 41)

Salicylates antagonize the uricosuric action of
probenecid and sulphinpyrazone and should not be
given concurrently. This interaction is exceptionally
well documented for both drugs and is of considerable
significance. Aspirin should not be taken during the
treatment of gout with either drug.

Aspiridspironolactone

A study on six subjects showed that 600 mg aspirin
reversed the natriuresis induced by spironolactone. It
has been suggested that aspirin might displace
spironolactone as a competitor with aldosterone at the
renal tubular receptor site (42). Any real significance
of this interaction is doubtful since spironolactone is
most often given in conjunction with other diuretics
(e.g. thiazides) to prevent potassium depletion.

Aspiridsodium
valproate

In five of six epileptic children taking valproic acid 1849 mg/kg daily, the steady-state serum free fractions of
valproic acid rose from 12 to 43% when antipyretic
doses of aspirin were also taken (43). Mean total
valproic acid half-life rose from 10.4 to 12.9 hr and
mean free valproic acid rose from 6.8 to 8.9 hr when
salicylate was present in the serum. Salicylate appeared
to displace valproic acid from serum albumin in v i m ,
but increased valproic acid half-life and changes in
valproic acid elimination patterns suggested that serum
salicylate had also altered valproic acids metabolism.
Although no untoward effects were noticed, results
suggest that prolonged use of aspirin with valproic acid
may result in greater than anticipated free levels of
valproic acid with cumulation to toxic levels. A related
study in children also confirmed that aspirin (up to
68 mg/kg daily) caused decreased clearance of free
fraction and 49% increase in free serum levels of
valproate without apparent untoward effects.(44). Coadministration of these drugs for more than 24 hr
might result in toxic levels of valproic acid due to
competition for active transport sites in renal tubules
or liver (44). Although no untoward effects were seen
in these studies, the results strongly suggest that this
combination should be avoided if possible, certainly
for any prolonged course of treatment with salicylates.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

9.2. OTHER NSAIDs
INTRODUCTION
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are thought to act through inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1 and -2 (Cox-1 and Cox-2) which are involved in the
synthesis of prostaglandins. Cox-1 is associated with adverse gastrointestinal effects,
whilst Cox-2 is associated with anti-inflammatory activity (45-47). Hence the
interest in highly selective inhibitors of Cox-2; meloxicam and nimesulide are two
such drugs.
Many NSAIDs possess centres of chirality within their molecular structure, with
different chiral forms (enantiomers) having different degrees of pharmacological
activity (48). The chirality of a drug may have subtle effects on its toxicity and
interactions.
Prostaglandins have an important role in the production of pain, inflammation
and fever and NSAIDs therefore find their main use as analgesics, antipyretics
and anti-inflammatory agents. In single doses, NSAIDs have analgesic activity
comparable to that of paracetamol, although paracetamol is preferred especially in
the elderly. In regular full dosage NSAIDs have both a lasting analgesic effect and
an anti-inflammatory action which makes them particularly useful for the treatment
of continuous or regular pain associated with inflammation. NSAIDs are more
appropriate than paracetamol or opioid analgesics in the inflammatory arthritides
(e.g. rheumatoid arthritis and some cases of advancd osteoarthritis). They may be
of some value in the less well defined conditions of back-pain and soft-tissue
disorders.
The following NSAIDs are in common clinical use in the UK:
aceclofenac
acemetacin
aspirin
azapropazone"
benorylate
diclofenac
piroxicam
diflunisal
etodolac
fenbufen
fenoprofen

indomethacin
ketoprofen
ketorolac trometamol (see CSM restrictions on dose and
duration of treatment (48)).
mefenamic acid
nabumetone
naproxen
phenylbutazone""
piroxicam
su1indac
tenoxicam
tiaprofenic acid

493

494

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

flurbiprofen
ibuprofen

tolmetin

* Azapropazone has been restricted in the UK by the CSM for use in rheumatoid arthritis, ankylozing
spondylitis and acute gout only when other NSAIDs have been tried and failed. The CSM has also
reminded of the need to advise patients taking azapropazone to avoid direct exposure to sunlight or to
use sunblock preparations.
** Phenylbutazone is a potent anti-inflammatory drug but because of occasional serious blood dyscrasias
its use in the UK is limited to the hospital treatment of ankylozing spondylitis.

Although there have been many studies comparing the efficacy of one NSAID with
one or several others there has been no wide-ranging comparison between between
all NSAIDs to allow them to be ranked in order of efficacy. Generally it is felt that
that there is little difference in anti-inflammatory activity between them, and the
choice is largely empirical. There has, however, been a recent evaluation by the
CSM of the safety of seven NSAIDs which has indicated that differences exist in
the risks of serious upper gastrointestinal side effects (49). Azapropazone is associated with the highest risk and ibuprofen with the lowest. Piroxicam, ketoprofen,
naproxen and diclofenac are associated with intermediate risks (possibly higher with
piroxicam). There are insufficient data to reach clear conclusions on the other
available oral NSAIDs.
Apart from their adverse effects on the gastrointestinal tract (peptic ulceration
and its complications of perforation and bleeding), other serious reactions are those
involving the kidney and liver, blood disorders and allergy (e.g. anaphylaxis),
which although less common are also important. CNS-related side effects include
headache, dizziness, nervousness, tinnitus, depression, drowsiness, and insomnia.
Hypersensitivity reactions may occur occasionally, and include fever, asthma, and
rashes. In respect of asthma the CSM has warned that any degree of worsening of
asthma may be related to the ingestion of NSAIDs, either prescribed or (in the
case of ibuprofen and others) purchased over the counter (50). Due to the increased
susceptibility of the elderly to the side effects of NSAIDs, the CSM has previously
warned that NSAIDs should be given to them only after other forms of treatment
have been considered. NSAIDs are contra-indicated in patients with a past history
of peptic ulceration
There is considerable variation in individual patients response to such drugs.
About 60% of patients will respond to any NSAID, of the others, those who do not
respond to one may well respond to another. An analgesic effect should normally be
obtained within 1 week, whereas an anti-inflammatory effect may not be achieved
for up to 3 weeks. If appropriate responses are not obtained within these times
then another NSAID should be tried.
INTERACTIONS
Notable interactions involving NSAIDs include possible enhancement of the effects
of oral anticoagulants and increased plasma concentrations of lithium, methotrexate
and cardiac glycosides. The risk of nephrotoxicity may be increased if given with

OTHER NSAIDs

495

ACE-inhibitors, cyclosporin or diuretics. There may also be an increased risk of
hyperkalaemia with ACE-inhibitors and potassium-sparing diuretics. The antihypertensive effect of some agents including ACE-inhibitors, P-blockers and diuretics
may be reduced. Convulsions may occur due to an interaction with quinolone
antibacterials. NSAIDs may enhance the effect of phenytoin and sulphonylurea
antidiabetics. The concomitant use of more than one NSAID should be avoided
because of the increased risk of adverse effects. The risk of gastrointestinal bleeding
and ulceration associated with NSAIDs is increased when used with corticosteroids.
Some NSAIDs can interfere with thyroid function tests by lowering serum thyroid
hormone concentrations. These and other interactions involving NSAIDs are described in the following Table of Drug Interactions (see also review article (51)).
Combination

Interaction

NSAID/antacid (52)

In fasting normal subjects, aluminium hydroxide gel
decreased the peak plasma concentration of diflunisal
by 46% , the AUC by 26% and the urinary recovery by
14%. In contrast, magnesium hydroxide suspension (in
the fasting state) increased early peak diflunisal
concentrations by 54% at 1 hr and 130% at 5 hr, and
increased the AUC by 10%. In the postprandial state
antacid, alone or combined, had no effect on diflunisal
bioavailability.

NSAID/antidiabetic
agents (53, 54)

Some anti-inflammatory agents and analgesics,
including azapropazone (53), phenylbutazone (55), and
salicylates (56), may increase the hypoglycaemic effects
of sulphonylureas and may necessitate a reduction in
their dosage requirements.

NSAID/antihypertensive

The antihypertensive effects of some agents, including
ACE-inhibitors, P-blockers and diuretics (see below)
may be reduced by concomitant administration of
NSAIDs. Indomethacin has been shown to interfere
with the hypotensive effects and the renin-stimulating
effects of captopril in normal subjects (57) and also to
reduce the hypotensive effect of oxprenolol by about
50% in patients with essential hypertension (58). These
interactions are thought to be due to the inhibition of
prostaglandin synthesis which is thought to have a role
in the action of these antihypertensives. Caution
should be exercized when NSAIDs are given to
patients receiving anti-hypertensive treatment.

496

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

NSAID/appetite
suppressant

Severe systemic hypertension developed in a patient
who took indomethacin shortly after ingesting an
appetite suppressant (Trimolets) containing
phenylpropanolamine . The mechanism of this
interaction was explained by indomethacins inhibition
of prostaglandin synthesis evoking enhanced
sympathomimetic effects of phenylpropanolamine (59).
An additional study showed that the ingestion of a
single dose of a phenylpropanolamine-containing
appetite suppressant (Trimolets) or decongestant
(Contuc 500)" caused a significant hypertensive
response to corticosteroid therapy in, respectively,
12/37 and 4/34 subjects. Twenty of the subjects taking
Trimolets reported adverse side effects (60).
* Contuc 500 formulation in Australia is equivalent to
Contuc 400 formulations elsewhere.

NSAID
(diclofenac)/cyclosporin
misoprostol

Deterioration in renal function has been reported after
the concomitant use of diclofenac and cyclosporin (61).
The AUC of diclofenac was reduced by some 20%
when it was given as a single 100-mg daily dose in the
form of a modified release preparation to subjects also
receiving misoprostol 800 pg daily. Concomitant
administration was also associated with an increase in
severity and incidence of gastrointestinal effects.
Studies by the manufacturer with this combination
failed to find any significant pharmacokinetic
interaction (62).

NSAID/cholest yramine
colestipol

Cholestyramine reduced the bioavailability of
diclofenac when the two agents were given together,
and colestipol produced a similar but smaller effect
(63) *

NSAID/diagnostic test

The presence of metabolites of etodolac in the urine
may give rise to a false positive reaction for bilirubin
(64). False-negative results in the dexamethasone
suppression test have been reported in patients taking
indomethacin (65). Some NSAIDs can interfere with
thyroid function tests by lowering serum thyroid
hormone concentrations (66).

OTHER NSAIDs

497

Combination

Interaction

NSAIDIdiuretic (67-74)

There are many early reports of interaction between
diuretics and NSAIDs. Indomethacin, in particular,
has been shown to attenuate or abolish the diuretic
and hypotensive effects of thiazide and loop diuretics.
Piroxicam is also known to have this effect and is
contraindicated in elderly patients with cardiac failure.
Reversible acute renal failure occurred in four patients
during dosage with indomethacin and triamterene.
Renal function was unaltered when each agent was
administered alone. It has been suggested that
prostaglandin unmasked the nephrotoxic potential of
triamterene (75). Deterioration of renal function has
been reported with diclofenac and triamterene (76).
The mechanism involved in these interactions may be
an interference with the production of renal
prostaglandins which are required to mediate the
action of the diuretics. This appears to be a class effect
of the NSAIDs. However, not all members have been
tested and there appears to be differences between the
different NSAIDs in this respect. Thus flurbiprofen
was found to have less effect than indomethacin on the
diuresis produced by frusemide. It has been suggested
that sulindac may be an exception to this general rule.
It has been shown not to inhibit frusemide-induced
renin release or natriuresis. This may be because
sulindac is itself a prodrug that is metabolized to an
active sulphide which is variably but irreversibly
converted to an inactive sulphone - thus, renal
metabolism may be protective. Apart from possible
variations between NSAIDs, patients will be sensitive
to this interaction depending on their degree of cardiac
failure, age, renal function, etc. NSAIDs are generally
contraindicated in patients requiring treatment with
diuretics,

NSAID (topical)/
eye drops

The manufacturer of acetylcholine ophthalmic
preparations has stated that there have been reports
that acetylcholine and carbachol have been ineffective
when used in patients treated with topical (ophthalmic)
NSAIDs (77).

498

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

Interaction

NSAIDAithium
diclofenac

In five normal women, diclofenac (50 mg tid for 7-10
days) reduced the renal clearance of lithium (12 mEq
bid) resulting in a clinically important increase (26%)
in steady-state plasma lithium concentration. This
effect may be associated with an inhibition of
prostaglandin synthesis since diclofenac also reduced
the urinary excretion of dinoprostone (prostaglandin
E2) by about 50% compared with placebo (78).

Indomethacin

Indomethacin increased plasma lithium concentrations
by 59% in psychiatric patients and by 30% in normal
subjects. Renal clearance was reduced by 31% in the
group as a whole. Prostaglandin synthesis was reduced
by 55% suggesting that renal clearances of lithium may
be affected by a prostaglandin-dependent mechanism
possibly in the distal renal tubule (79).

NSAIDImethotrexate
azapropazone

Severe, and in some cases fatal, aggravation of
methotrexate toxicity has been reported when it was
administered with various NSAIDs (80-85) including
azapropazone (82), aspirin and other salicylates (80,
81). The mechanism is uncertain but may include both
displacement of methotrexate from protein-binding
sites or an effect of NSAIDs on the kidney resulting in
reduced methotrexate excretion (85, 86).

Indomethacin

One patient has been reported to suffer acute renal
failure due to the concomitant action of methotrexate
and indomethacin (87). The mechanism was suggested
to be an indomethacin-induced inhibition of renal
prostaglandin (PGE2) synthesis which would decrease
vasodilatation. The inhibition of renin release is also
dependent upon PEG2. These two together would
decrease the renal perfusion of methotrexate. There is
a further possibility that a biotransformation of
methotrexate and indomethacin in the liver could
produce a combination which is not easily eliminated
by the kidneys. An earlier report described two
patients who suffered fatal acute renal failure when
receiving sequential intermediate-dose methotrexate

OTHER NSAIDs

Combination

499

Interaction

and 5-fluorouracil therapy to which indomethacin was
added (88).
Ketoprofen

Diclofenac

Naproxen

Two cases of lethal methotrexate toxicity have been
reported in patients who were also taking ketoprofen
(89); 118 cycles of high-dose methotrexate given to 36
patients over 5 years were also examined
retrospectively to estimate the number with severe
toxicity and to assess the role of ketoprofen or other
NSAIDs in this toxicity.
Of the 36 patients (118 cycles), 24 patients (104 cycles)
were free of toxicity; five patients (five cycles) were
associated with WHO classification grade 1-11 toxicity
and nine patients (nine cycles) with grade 111-IV
toxicity. Co-administation of ketoprofen was found in
four of these nine patients which were characterized by
severe methotrexate toxicity; of the remaining five
cases, of severe methotrexate toxicity, one was
associated with concomitant dosage of another
NSAID, diclofenac (83).
The simultaneous administration of high-dose
methotrexate and ketoprofen was associated with
prolonged and striking enhancement of serum
methotrexate levels. The mechanism of the interaction
was thought to be inhibition of renal prostaglandin
synthesis by ketoprofen which would decrease renal
perfusion rate and thus inhibit methotrexate clearance.
An alternative was competitive renal secretion of the
two drugs. The authors of this report warned that a
severe interaction might be anticipated with other
NSAIDs.
One case has been reported of a fatality attributed to a
methotrexate-naproxen interaction after the
administration of low-dose methotrexate (2.5 mg, 12
hourly, planned for three consecutive doses weekly)
together with conventional doses of naproxen. The
elderly patient with rhumatoid arthritis unresponsive to
penicillamine and gold, developed fever and diarrhoea
within 24 hr of receiving the combination. The patient
was admitted to hospital and died. The cause of death

500

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Naproxen cont.

Interaction

was attributed to an interaction between methotrexate
and naproxen and was complicated by an apparent
overdose of methotrexate by the patient (90).
Evidence has accumulated over the last few years that
the use of NSAIDs alone can produce a variety of
untoward renal effects. The most common form is
acute renal failure resulting from haemodynamic
changes secondary to the inhibition of prostaglandin
synthesis. Elderly patients are at greatest risk. At the
request of the CSM, all data sheets for NSAIDs now
include a statement that these drugs can cause renal
toxicity (91).
Despite the risks, methotrexate and NSAIDs are
frequently prescribed together in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis (92, 93), and provided this is done
with caution in low doses, and patients are monitored
and cautioned to avoid additional over-the-counter
analgesics, such combinations need not be contraindicated. There is also an opposing view that the use
of any NSAID with methotrexate is not justified in
view of the unacceptable, possibly fatal, toxicity that it
may produce. This has already been demonstrated with
four NSAIDs.

Flurbiprofen
Ketoprofen
Piroxicam

However, a recent study in patients given low doses of
methotrexate for rheumatoid arthritis suggested that
flurbiprofen, ketoprofen or piroxicam given
concomitantly did not influence methotrexate toxicity
(94) *

NSAID/NSAID

Concurrent administration of anti-inflammatory doses
of aspirin increased indomethacin blood concentrations
by about 20%. Administration of indomethacin with
diflunisal decreased the renal clearance and increased
the plasma concentration of indomethacin. Combined
use of indomethacin and diflunisal has resulted in fatal
gastrointestinal haemorrhage therefore these drugs
should not be used concurrently (65).

NSAIDIphenytoin

Various analgesics and anti-inflammatory agents have
been reported to interact with phenytoin.

OTHER NSAIDS

Combination

Azapropazone
Ibuprofen

Phenylbutazone

501

Interaction

Azapropazone appears to be a competitive inhibitor of
phenytoin metabolism and has also been implicated in
interactions resulting in toxicity (95, 96).
There is a single report of toxicity in a patient
receiving ibuprofen with with phenytoin (97); however,
in a study in nine healthy subjects, ibuprofen had no
effect on the pharmacokinetics of phenytoin (98).
Phenylbutazone has been reported to cause an initial
decrease in serum phenytoin, followed by an increase
(99); in addition to its effects on protein binding, it
inhibits phenytoin metabolism (100) and severe
phenytoin toxicity may result (101).

NSAID (diflunisal)/
probenecid

Average steady-state plasma concentrations of
diflunisal were increased by 65% when it was
administered with probenecid (102). This was due
mainly to reduced formation of phenolic and acyl
glucuronides. However, probenecid reduced their renal
clearance so plasma concentrations of these
glucuronides and also the sulphate conjugate increased.
Plasma concentrations of indomethacin are also likely
to be increased in patients receiving indomethacin,
ketoprofen or naproxen.

NSAID/quinolone
antimicrobial

Convulsions may occur due to an interaction between
the quinolones and NSAIDs. Three such interactions
have been reported to the CSM, who have urged
caution when considering the use of a quinolone in
patients with a history of convulsions or epilepsy and
in those who are already receiving a NSAID. In this
respect it is important to note that the epileptogenic
potential of the quinolone group of antimicrobials has
long been recognized. The CSM has received 26
reports of convulsions associated with the use of
ciprofloxacin, one case with norfloxacin and one case
with ofloxacin. The reactions can occur in patients
known to have epilepsy and in those with no previous
history of convulsions. (91).

NSAID/various drugs in
solution

Indomethacin sodium injection is reconstituted with
preservative-free sodium chloride or water for
injection. It is incompatible with preparations

502

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

NSAID/various drugs in
solution cont.

containing glucose, and reconstitution at a pH (below
6) may cause precipitation of indomethacin. Visual
incompatibility, possibly due to low pH below 6, has
been reported between indomethacin sodium injection
and tolazoline hydrochloride (103), 7.5 and 10%
glucose injection, calcium gluconate, dobutamine,
dopamine, cimetidine (104), gentamicin sulphate and
tobramycin sulphate (105).

NSAID/warfarin
(106-108)

NSAIDs should be used with caution, or not at all, in
patients on warfarin or other anticoagulant. Many
NSAIDs inhibit platelet function to some extent and
have an irritant effect on the gastrointestinal tract, so
increasing the risk of haemorrhage. Furthermore, some
NSAIDs increase the hypoprothrombinaemic effect of
warfarin possibly by an intrinsic effect on coagulation
or by displacement of warfarin from plasma protein
binding sites. Many in vitro studies have attempted to
compare the relative displacing action of a range of
NSAIDs, but the results cannot easily be extrapolated
into the clinical situation. Changes in plasma
concentration of unbound warfarin resulting from
displacement interactions are most likely to occur in
the first few weeks after an NSAID is added to, or
withdrawn from, warfarin therapy; monitoring of
anticoagulant therapy is therefore critical during this
time.
Concurrent administration of phenylbutazone and
warfarin has led to serious haemorrhage and should be
avoided. This NSAID effects the metabolism of the Rand S-isomers of warfarin in complex and different
ways with the net effect of enhancing its anticoagulant
activity (109). Other NSAIDs, e.g. oxyphenbutazone,
azapropazone (110-112) and feprazone (113) behave
similarly and these combinations should also be
avoided.
For the following NSAIDs, there are a few studies or
isolated reports suggesting that they may enhance the
hypoprothrombinaemic effect of warfarin or other
specified anticoagulant: diflunisal and nicoumalone
(114) on warfarin (115); flurbiprofen and nicoumalone
(116), indomethacin (117, 118), ketoprofen (119),

OTHER N S A I D ~

Combination

503

Interaction

meclofenamate sodium (120), mefenamic acid (121),
piroxicam (122), sulindac (107, 108), tiaprofenic acid
(with nicoumalone) (123), and tolmetin sodium (124).
In many cases the result of the interaction was an
increased prothrombin time which may or may not be
clinically significant; in other cases haemorrhage
occurred. For many of the above NSAIDs, particularly
indomethacin, there are also studies which failed to
shown any enhancement of warfarin’s activity.
NSAIDs with apparently minimal activity on warfarin’s
activity include etodolac, ibuprofen, naproxen and
tenidap (125). In view of these considerations,
NSAIDs should not be used and paracetamol is
recommended as the general analgesic and antipyretic
for patients receiving anticoagulant therapy. There is,
however, still a risk of of bleeding in patients taking
regular doses of paracetamol whilst receiving
anticoagulants (126).
REFERENCES

1 Starko KM et al. (1980) Pediatrics 66, 859.
2 Waldman RJ et al. (1982) J A M A 247, 3089.
3 Halpin TJ et al. (1982) J A M A 248, 687.
4 Rennebohm RM et al. (1985) J Pediatr 107, 877.
5 Hurwitz ES et al. (1987) J A M A 257, 1905.
6 Hall SM et al. (1988) Arch Dis Child 63, 857.
7 Miners JO. (1989) Clin Pharmacokinet 17, 327.
8 Gerber JG et al. (1993) Clin Pharmacol Ther 54, 523.
9 Hall D et al. (1992) J Am Coll Cardiol20, 1549.
10 Sturrock NDC, Struthers AD. (1993) Br J Clin Pharmacol 35, 343.
11 Cleland JGF et al. (1995) Br Heart J 74, 215.
12 Gopulsten K, Cook AR. (1968) Br Med J 4 , 664.
13 Deykin D et al. (1982) N Engl J Med 306, 852.
14 Udall JA. (1970) Clin Med 77, 20.
15 Koch-Weser J, Sellers EM. (1971) N Engl J Med 285, 487 (Part l), 547 (Part 2).
16 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin (1972) 10, 25.
17 Ring ME et al. (1986) J Clin Pharmacol26, 719.
18 Verzino E et al. (1994) Ann Pharmacother 28, 536.
19 Kilnenberg JR, Miller F. (1965) J A M A 194, 601.
20 Emmanuel JH, Montgomery RD. (1971) Postgrad Med J 47, 227.
21 Phillips KR et al. (1993) Pediatr Znfect Dis J 12, 350.
22 Wishinsky H et al. (1962) Diabetes 2 (Suppl), 18.
23 Stowers JM, Hunter RB. (1959) A n n N Y Acad Sci 74, 689.
24 Chemer R et al. (1963) J A M A 185, 883.
25 Peaston MJT, Finnegan P. (1968) Br J Clin Pract 22, 30.
26 Dixon RL et al. (1965) Fed Proc 24, 4354.

504

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

27 Brodie BB et al. (1965) Proc Roy Soc Med 58, 946.
28 Oyer JH et al. (1966) Am J Med Sci 251, 1.
29 Bluestone R et al. (1969) Br Med J 4, 590.
30 Day RO et al. (1988) Br J Clin Pharmacol26, 455.
31 Day R O et al. (1984) Clin Rheum Dis 10, 251.
32 Fraser D G et al. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 27, 165.
33 Olanow OW et al. (1981) Neurology 31, 341.
34 Leonard RF et al. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 29, 56.
35 Inoue F, Walsh RJ. (1983) Neurology 33, 115.
36 Paxton I. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 27, 170.
37 Robinson WD. (1957) J A M A 164, 1670.
38 Smith MJH, Smith PK. (1986) The Salicylates, Interscience Publishers, New York, p.
86.
39 Prescott LF. (1969) Lancet ii, 1239.
40 Seegmiller JE, Grayzel AI. (1960) J A M A 173, 1076.
41 Yii TF et al. (1963) J Clin Invest 42, 1330.
42 Eliott H. (1962) Metabolism 11, 1015.
43 Orr JM et al. (1982) Clin Pharmacol Ther 31, 642.
44 Farrell K et al. (1982) J Pediatr 101, 142.
45 Hayllar J, Bjarnason I. (1995) Lancet 346,521.
46 Bennett A , Tavares IA. (1995) Lancet 346, 1105.
47 Vane JR. (1995) Lancet 346, 1105.
48 Committee on Safety of Medicines (1993) Curr Problems 19, 5.
49 Committee on Safety of MedicinesNedicines Control Agency (1994) Curr Problems 20,
9.
50 Committee on Safety of Medicines (1987) Curr Problems No. 27. CSM, London.
51 Brouwers JRBJ, de Smet PAGM (1994) Clin Pharmacokinet 27, 462.
52 Tobert J A et al. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 39, 385.
53 Andreasen PB et al. (1981) Br J Clin Pharmacol 12, 581.
54 Allen PA, Taylor RT. (1980) Br Med J 281, 1642.
55 Harris EL (1971) Br Med J 3, 29.
56 Richardson T et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pharmacol22, 43.
57 Witzgall H et al. (1982) Clin Sci 62, 611.
58 Smith SR et al. (1983) Br J Clin Pharmacol 15, 267.
59 Lee KY et al. (1979) Lancet i , 1110.
60 Horowitz JD et al. (1980) Lancet i , 60.
61 Branthwaite JP, Nichols A. (1991) Lancet 337, 252.
62 Karim A. (1993) Drugs 45 (Suppl.l), 7.
63 Al-balla SR et al. (1994) Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol32, 441.
64 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 41.
65 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 52.
66 Bishnoi A et al. (1994) Am J Med 96, 235.
67 Symmons DPM et al. (1983) Znt J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxic01 21, 350.
68 Ciabattoni G et al. (1980) Eur J Rheumatol Infzamm 3 , 210.
69 Kwan KC et al. (1977) Postgrad Med Commun (May) 13.
70 Patak RV et al. (1975) Prostaglandins 10, 649.
71 Allan SG et al. (1981) Br Med J 283, 1611.
72 Pedrinelli R et al. (1980) Clin Pharmacol Ther 28, 722.
73 Watkins J et al. (1980) Br Med J 281, 702.
74 Rawles JM. (1982) Scott Med J 27, 37.
75 Favre L et al. (1982) A n n Intern Med 96, 317.

OTHER N S A I D ~

505

76 Harkonen M, Ekblom-Kullberg S. (1986) Br Med J 293, 698.
77 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 36.
78 Reimann IW, Frolich JC. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 30, 348.
79 Frolich JC et al. (1979) Br Med J 1, 1115.
80 Baker H. (1970) Br J Dermatol82, 65.
81 Zuik M, Mandel MA. (1975) Surg Forum 26, 567.
82 Daly HM et al. (1986) Br J Dermatol 114, 733.
83 Gabrielli A et al. (1987) Br Med J 294, 776.
84 Maiche AG. (1986) Lancet i, 1390.
85 Thyss A et al. (1986) Lancet i, 256.
86 Furst D E et al. (1990) J Pharm Sci 79, 782.
87 Maiche AG. (1986) Lancet i, 1390.
88 Ellison NM, Servi RJ. (1985) Cancer Treat Rep 69, 342.
89 Thyss A et al. (1985) Lyon Meditterran2e Medical-Medecine du Sud Est 21, 9757.
90 Singh RR et al. (1986) Lancet i, 1390.
91 Committee on Safety of Medicines (1991) Curr Problems No. 32. CSM, London.
92 Tully M. (1991) Pharm J 247, 746.
93 Zachariae M. (1992) Br J Dermatol 126, 95.
94 Tracy TS et al. (1994) Br J Clin Pharmacol37, 453.
95 Roberts CJC et al. (19 81) Postgrad Med J 57, 191.
96 Geaney DP et al. (1982) Br Med J 284, 1373.
97 Sandyk R. (1982) S Afr Med J 62, 592.
98 Townsend RJ et al. (1985) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 19, 447.
99 Neuvonen PJ et al. (1979) Eur J Clin Pharmacol 15, 263.
100 Andresen PB et al. (1973) Acta Med Scand 193, 561.
101 Kristensen MB (1976) Clin Pharmacokinet 1 , 351.
102 Macdonald JI et al. (1995) Eur J Clin Pharmacol47, 519.
103 Marquardt ED. (1990) Am J Hosp Pharm 47, 1802.
104 Ishisaka DY et al. (1991) A m J Hosp Pharm 48, 2442.
105 Thompson DF, Heflin NR. (1992) Am J Hosp Pharm 49, 836.
106 Self TH et al. (1978) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 12, 580.
107 Carter SA. (1979) Lancet ii, 698.
108 Ross JRY, Beeley L. (1979) Lancet ii, 1075.
109 Banfield C et al. (1983) Br J Clin Pharmacol 16, 669.
110 Powell-Jackson PR. (1977) Br Med J 1, 1193.
111 Green A E et al. (1977) Br Med J 1, 1532.
112 Win N, Mitchell DC. (1991) Br Med J 302, 969.
113 Chierichetti S et al. (1975) Curr Ther Res 18, 568.
114 Temper0 KF et al. (1977) Br J Clin Pharmacol4, 31s.
115 Serlin MJ et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol9, 287P.
116 Stricker BHC, Delhez JL. (1982) Br Med J 285, 812.
117 Koch-Weser J. (1973) Clin Pharmacol Ther 14, 139.
118 Self TH et al. (1975) Lancet ii, 557.
119 Flessner MF. (1988) J A M A 259, 353.
120 Baragar FD, Smith TC. (1978) Curr Ther Res 23 (Suppl, 4), S51.
121 Holmes EL (1966) A n n Phys Med 9 (Suppl), 36.
122 Rhodes RS et al. (1985) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 19, 556.
123 Whittaker SJ et al. (1986) Br J Clin Pract 40, 440.
124 Koren J F et al. (1987) Am J Med 82, 1278.
125 Reynolds JEF (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, The Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 967.
126 Boeijinga JJ et al. (1982) Lancet i, 506.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 10
Drug Interactions with Vaccines and
Interferons
Vaccines are defined as preparations of antigenic materials which are administered
with the object of inducing in the recipient a specific active immunity to specific
bacteria or viruses. They may contain living or killed micro-organisms or bacterial
toxins or toxoids; vaccines may be simple vaccines prepared from a single species
or strain or mixed vaccines involving a mixture of one or more species or strains.
Interactions between a vaccine and a drug have so far been reported for a limited
number of drugs.
Bacillus Calmette-GuCrin (BCG) vaccine (1), endotoxin (2), interferon-inducing
agents (3), and interferon itself (4), depress cytochrome P450 activity in laboratory
animals. The induction of interferons are thought to be the cause of a number of
reported vaccine drug interactions in man.
The second group of vaccine/drug interactions relate to immunosuppressive or
corticosteroid therapy. In this context the following general advice should be followed.
(a) Live vaccines should not be given during corticosteroid therapy or cancer

chemotherapy or immunosuppressive therapy. Administration of live vaccines
should be postponed for 3 months after stopping corticosteroid therapy or 6
months after stopping cancer chemotherapy or immunosuppressive therapy.
(b) Live vaccines should not be administered to pregnant women.
(c) If exposure to measles or other infectious disease has taken place in circumstances (a) or (b) above the use of appropriate immunoglobulins may be acceptable.

507

508

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

(d) The use of vaccines in HIV-positive subjects has been the subject of guidance
from the British Department of Health:

( i ) HIV-positive patients may be given the following live vaccines: measles, mumps,
poliomyelitis and rubella. The may be given the following inactivated vaccines:
cholera, diphtheria, Haernophilus influenzae type b, meningococcal, tetanus, typhoid (injection).
(ii) HIV-positive subjects should not receive BCG, yellow fever, typhoid (oral). If
live poliomyelitis vaccine is given to HIV-positive patients they continue to excrete
live virus in their faeces for longer than normal subjects.
(e) Haernophilus influenzae B vaccine is not a live vaccine and can be used in
immuno-compromized children. Vaccination need not be postponed because of
a minor illness without fever or systemic upset. Previous invasive Haernophilus
influenzae B infection may not induce immunity in those under 2 years, so
immunization is still recommended ( 5 , 6).

INTERFERONS
Interferons are naturally occurring proteins with complex effects on immunity and
cell function. Interferons a,p and ylb are commercially available.
Interferons are produced naturally within the body in response to antigenic
challenge particularly viral infections. While a-,p- and y-interferons share certain
properties, interferon Ylb has potent phagocyte-activating properties not seen with
the other interferons ( 7 ) .
Interferon (Y is used in the treatment of hairy-cell leukaemia, recurrent or metastatic
renal cell carcinoma, AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma, chronic active hepatitis B,
chronic hepatitis C, chronic myelogenous leukaemia, condylomata acuminata and
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
Interferon a has been shown to affect oxidative metabolic processes and to reduce
the metabolic clearance of theophylline.
Side effects: the most frequently reported symptoms are those of a ‘flu-like’illness;
depression and suicidal behaviour, myelosuppression, cardiovascular effects and
hepatotoxicity have been reported.
Interferon p has recently been approved by a number of national drug regulatory
authorities for use in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis (characterized by at
least two attacks of neurological dysfunction over the previous 2-year period, followed by complete or incomplete recovery).
Interferon p should not be used in patients with a history of severe depressive
illness, inadequately controlled epilepsy or hepatic impairment.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH VACCINES AND INTERFERONS

509

Interactions: Interferon beta does not appear to affect hepatic drug metabolism.
Side effects include reactions at injection site, flu-like symptoms, and occasionally
hypersensitivity reactions (e.g. bronchospasm, anaphylaxis and urticaria), depression and anxiety, and convulsions.
Interferon Y1b is used as an adjunct to antibiotics to reduce frequency of serious
infection, i.e. patients with chronic granulomatous disease.
Side effects: the most commonly reported side effects are the flu-like symptoms of
fever, headache, myalgia. Serious hypersensitivity reactions have been reported.
Interactions: Interferon Ylb impairs the hepatic metabolism of drugs metabolized
by the cytochrome P450 system. The effects of alcohol are potentiated.
Combination

Interaction

Antibiotics and
antimalarials/oral live
attenuated typhoid
vaccine (8, 9)

Oral typhoid vaccine is taken by mouth in an enteric
coated capsule, one capsule being taken on alternate
days for three doses. Protection may persist for up to
three years.
The vaccine is inactivated by concomitant
administration of antibiotics or sulphonamides and
mefloquine.

Azathioprinelvaccines
(10)

The immunosuppressive activity of azathioprine could
result in atypical and life-threatening infections in
response to live vaccines. Killed vaccines are likely to
be ineffective when given to patients on azathioprine.
Hepatitis B vaccine being a case in point.

Chloroquine/Rabies
vaccine BP (11-12)

Studies have shown that concomitant administration of
chloroquine reduces the antibody response to this
vaccine with human diploid cell rabies vaccine.

Cyclosporinhaccines
(13-20)

With killed vaccines there is reduced efficacy of the
vaccine due to immunosuppression. With live vaccines
there is a significant risk of severe infection.
Prospective cyclosporin therapy warrants assessment of
each patient’s immune protection against infectious
diseases preventable with vaccines or toxoids.
Vaccines and toxoids require T-helper cells to exert
their protective effect, and the action of cyclosporin is
to suppress the action of T-helper cells. In general it
appears that in patients on cyclosporin existing

510

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Cyclosporidvaccines
cont.

immune responsiveness is retained but the ability to
evoke new immune responses is impaired.

Insulidinterferon
(49-52)

A 66-year-old man with maturity onset diabetes
developed a rapidly reversible increase in insulin
requirement while receiving interferon aZafor hepatitis
C. The patient’s diabetes had been controlled on 62
units of insulin (Mixtard) for 3 years. After 3 months
treatment with interferon his insulin requirement had
risen to 118 units of insulin per day.
Interferon was discontinued and within 8 days his
insulin requirement fell to 28 units per day (49).
Impaired glucose tolerance has been shown in healthy
subjects during interferon therapy (50) and in a nondiabetic patients treated with interferon for hepatitis
(51, 52).

Phenytoidinfluenza
vaccine (21-25)

Contradictory results have been reported for the
effects of influenza vaccine on serum phenytoin
concentrations. Jann and Fidone (21) reported a
significant elevation in total phenytoin concentration
following vaccination which was suggested to be due to
interferon induction and concomitant inhibition of
cytochrome P450. In contrast, other reports have
suggested that any increase in serum phenytoin
concentration was temporary and not significant overall
(22), or even that there was a slight fall in serum
phenytoin concentration (23).
One study reported a significant increase in total
phenytoin concentration 2 days after vaccination,
followed by a return to previous values but this was
accompanied by evidence of a gradual and prolonged
fall in free phenytoin concentrations (24). The
possibility of either phenytoin toxicity or loss of seizure
control may exist in some epileptic patients given
influenza vaccine during phenytoin therapy (25).

TheophyllineBCG
(1, 26)

Transient inhibition of the hepatic metabolism,
possibly secondary to interferon production resulting in
increased theophylline serum half-life and

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH VACCINES AND INTERFERONS

Combination

511

Interaction

concentration has been reported after BCG vaccine.
There is a possibility of theophylline toxicity.
Theophylline/influenza
vaccines (27-37)

Eleven children whose asthma had been controlled
with a stable theophylline dose developed signs of
theophylline toxicity on the same dose during an
influenza B outbreak (27). All had clinical evidence of
a febrile viral illness. Two children had seizures, eight
had nausea and vomiting, and three had headaches.
Theophylline clearance gradually returned to preillness levels over a period of 1-3 months (27). These
cases supported the earlier contention that
theophylline clearance was decreased during natural
viral respiratory infections (28-30). Decreased
elimination of theophylline also occurred after
influenza immunization in patients and in volunteer
subjects (29). In contrast, other studies have indicated
that influenza immunization had no effect on
theophylline levels in patients with chronic airway
obstruction (31, 32). However, the original
investigators have reiterated their previous conclusion
that influenza vaccine does alter theophylline’s
metabolism and have suggested that the discrepancy in
findings may be due to the use of different vaccines
and that these may have different peak timing of their
depressant effect on drug metabolism (33).
Agents that induce interferon can inactivate hepatic
cytochrome P450. Inasmuch as viruses are inducers of
interferon, this synthesis may be the most likely
mechanism of influenza virus and vaccine in altering
theophylline pharmacokinetics (34). Support is given to
this by the demonstration that influenza vaccination
depresses aminopyrine metabolism in man (35).
More recently a study in elderly subjects showed that
clinically significant reactions to warfarin or
theophylline were rare after influenza vaccinations and
were no more frequent than in those not receiving
vaccinations. Further, following influenza vaccination
in 13 elderly individuals serum concentrations of

512

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Theophylline/influenza
vaccines cont.

theophylline showed no change. Others have found no
effect of influenza vaccine on theophylline clearance
in normal subjects nor in those with chronic
obstructive airways disease.
It must also be appreciated that, in theophyllinetreated patients, symptoms of vomiting, headaches or
seizures during viral illness may be due to theophylline
toxicity rather than to the virus. Such patients should
have an immediate serum theophylline determination
even if previous levels were in the therapeutic range
(27) *
In practice, clinically significant interactions have been
shown to occur with influenza virus infections but not
following vaccinations.
The British National Formulary remains cautious by
stating “plasma-theophylline concentrations
occasionally increased by influenza vaccine”. The Data
sheets to none of the commercially available influenza
vaccines refer to this interaction (36) and the reference
to this in the data sheets of theophylline preparations
is not universal (37).

Warfaridinfluenza
vaccine (35, 38-45)

There have been a few reports of increased
prothrombin time and bleeding in warfarin-stabilized
patients following influenza vaccination. Studies
investigating this possible interaction have found only a
small or inconsistent increase in warfarin activity (35,
38-41) or no effect (42-44). One study suggested that
influenza vaccine decreases rather than increases the
prothrombin time (45).

Warfaridinterferon a
(9, 46-49)

The half life of warfarin is increased due to inhibition
of cytochrome P450.
The fact that the metabolism of a number of drugs is
inhibited by vaccines and this is due to interferon is
supported by the work of Adachi et al. (46). After
giving interferon to a patient with chronic hepatitis C,
who had been taking warfarin, these clinicians
observed increased anticoagulation. There was an

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH VACCINES AND INTERFERONS

Combination

513

Interaction

increased serum warfarin concentration which
necessitated a reduction in warfarin dosage. Their
patient, a 52-year-old woman with a history of posttransfusion chronic hepatitis C after heart surgery, had
received warfarin postoperatively. Her maintenance
dose alternated between 3.5 and 2.5 mg daily.
Investigations on admission to hospital showed a
prothrombin time of 16.7 s (international normalized
ratio of 1.60), a Thrombotest result of 27%, and a
serum warfarin concentration of 50.8 mg/ml. She
started taking human lymphoblastoid interferon a at a
dose of 6.0 MU daily for 14 days and then three times
a week. Although the results of other liver function
tests did not change appreciably, prothrombin time
increased to 20.4 s (internationalized ratio 1.99).
Thrombotest results decreased to 17% and serum
warfarin concentrations rose to 5.2 mg/ml. Warfarin
dosage was reduced stepwise to 2.0 mg/day. Some
weeks later anticoagulation and serum warfarin
concentrations had returned to nearly their initial
values.
The authors of this report have also had to decrease
the dose of warfarin in four other patients, two taking
interferon p and two taking interferon aZp
concomitantly with warfarin. Interferon does not
directly affect the coagulation system, but it is known
to inhibit hepatic microsomal enzymes, (47, 48) thus
the potentiation of warfarin’s activity is likely to be the
result of a decrease in its hepatic metabolism. The
authors warned that the degree of anticoagulation
should be carefully monitored when interferon is given
to patients who are receiving warfarin.
REFERENCES

1 Farquhar D et al. (1976) Biochem Pharmacol25, 1529.
2 Gorodisher R et al. (1976) Biochem Pharmacol25, 351.
3 Renton KW, Mannering GJ. (1976) Biochem, Biophy Res Commun 73,343.
4 Sonnenfeld G et al. (1980) Antimicrob Agents Chemotherap 17, 969.
5 Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation DOH. (1966) Immunisation against
infectious diseases, HMSO, London, pp. 77-84.
6 Cates KL et al. (1987) Paediatr Infect Dis J 6 , 572-5.
7 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 146,
920, 1000, 1036, and 1044 (Interferons).

514

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

8 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Datapharm Publications Ltd, London, p. 321
(live attenuated typhoid vaccine).
9 British National Formulary. (March 1996) No. 31, Section 14.4, British Medical Association and the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London, p. 510.
10 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p.
1189 (azathioprine).
11 Taylor DN et al. (1984) Lancet i, 1405.
12 Pappaionanou M et al. (1986) N Engl J Med 314, 280.
13 Lindsey NJ et al. (1980) Transplant Proc 12, 252.
14 D’Arcy PF. (1985) Pharm Int 6 , 291.
15 Grabstein JD, Baker JR. (1985) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 19, 679.
16 Versluis DJ et al. (1985) Antiviral Res 5 (Suppl l), 289.
17 Beyer WEP et al. (1987) Transplant Proc 18, 319.
18 Versluis DJ et al. (1987) Transplant Proc 18, 1348.
19 Mohaghegpour N et al. (1983) J Clin Invest 72, 2092.
20 Hess AD et al. (1983) Transplant Proc 15, 539.
21 Jann MW, Fidone GS. (1986) Clin Pharm 5 , 817.
22 Levine M et al. (1984) Clin Pharm 3, 505.
23 Sawchuk RJ et al. (1979) Ther Drug Monit 1, 285.
24 Smith CD et al. (1988) Clin Pharm 7, 828.
25 Grabenstein JD. (1990) DIC Ann Pharmacother 24, 67.
26 Gray JD et al. (1983) Br J Clin Pharmacoll6, 735.
27 Kraemer J et al. (1982) Pediatrics 69, 476.
28 Renton KW et al. (1980) Can Med Assoc J 123, 288.
29 Walker S et al. (1981) Can Med Assoc J 125, 243.
30 Chang KC et al. (1987) Lancet i, 1132.
31 Goldstein RS et al. (1982) Can Med Assoc J 126, 470.
32 Fischer RG. (1982) Can Med Assoc J 126, 1312.
33 Renton KW, Gray JD. (1982) Can Med Assoc J 125, 470.
34 Harless GR. (1983) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 17, 132.
35 Kramer P, McClain CJ. (1981) N Engl J Med 305, 1262.
36 A B P I Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, Fluvirin p. 311, Fluarix p. 1103, Fluzone p. 1115, Influvac p. 374, Pasteur Merieux p. 735.
37 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1995-96) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
83, 545, 572, 659, 833, 981 (theophylline).
38 Patriarca PA et al. (1983) New Engl J Med 308, 1601.
39 Gomolin IH et al. (1985) J Am Geriatr Soc 33, 269.
40 Kramer P et al. (1984) Clin Pharmacol Ther 35, 416.
41 Weibert RT et al. (1986) Clin Pharm 5, 499.
42 Lipsky BA et al. (1984) Ann Intern Med 100, 835.
43 Scott AK et al. (1985) Br J Clin Pharmacol 19, 144P.
44 Gomolin IH. (1986) Can Med Assoc J 135, 39.
45 Bussey HI, Saklad JJ. (1988) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 22, 198.
46 Adachi Y et al. (1995) B r Med J 311, 292.
47 Williams SJ et al. (1987) Lancet ii, 939-41.
48 Okuno H et al. (1993) Hepatology 17, 65-69.
49 Campbell S et al. (1996) B r Med J 313, 92.
50 Kiovisto VA et al. (1989) Diabetes 38, 641.
51 Fabris P et al. (1992) Lancet 340, 548.
52 Lopes EPA et al. (1994) Lancet 343, 224.

CHAPTER 11
Drug Interactions with Agents used in
Anaesthesia

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

11.1. DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH
LOCAL ANAESTHETICS

Local anaesthetics act by producing a reversible block to conduction along nerve
fibres, the smaller and unmyelinated nerve fibres are more sensitive than larger
heavily myelinated nerve fibres. Therefore, it is possible to produce a differential
block so that smaller fibres carrying pain sensation are anaesthetized but sparing
coarse touch and movement.
I. LOCAL ANAESTHETICS OF THE ESTER TYPE
Amethocaine hydrochloride: an effective local anaesthetic for topical application. It
is rapidly absorbed from mucous membranes. It should never be applied to inJZarned
or traumatized areas. It should never be used for bronchoscopy or cystoscopy.
Benzocaine is a local anaesthetic of low potency. It is an ingredient of many proprietary throat lozenges.
Cocaine readily penetrates mucous membranes and is an effective surface anaesthetic with an intense vasoconstrictor action. It has marked sympathomimetic activity as a result of its intense stimulant effect on the CNS. It is a drug of addiction.
Procaine hydrochloride: local anaesthesia by infiltration and regional routes.
11. LOCAL ANAESTHETICS OF THE AMIDE TYPE
Bupivacaine hydrochloride: the great advantage of bupivacaine over other local
anaesthetics is its duration of action of up to 8 hr. It has a slow onset of action,
taking up to 30 min. It is useful in lumbar epidural blockade and is suitable for
continuous epidural analgesia in labour. It is the drug of choice for spinal anesthesia.
It is contraindicated in intravenous regional anaesthesia (Bierís block).
Butanilicaine phosphate
Lignocaine hydrochloride: lignocaine is the most widely used local anaesthetic. It
acts more rapidly and is more stable than other local anaesthetics. It is effectively
absorbed from mucous membranes, and can therefore be used in surface anaesthesia. Except for surface anaesthesia solutions should not exceed 1%.

5 17

518

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Lignocaine is frequently used with adrenaline 1 in 200 000.
In addition to its local anaesthetic uses lignocaine has a role as an antiarrhythmic
agent.
Lignocaine should be used with caution in patients with epilepsy, impaired cardiac
conduction with bradycardia, or porphyria.
Lignocaine can be used for surface anaesthesia, infiltration, injection, nerve block
and epidural and caudal block.

Mepivacaine hydrochloride
Prilocaine: prilocaine is a local anaesthetic of low toxicity and is similar in its uses
to lignocaine. If used in high doses methaemoglobinaemia may occur. This can be
treated with intravenous methylene blue 1% at a dose of 1mg/kg (Griffin 1997).
Drug interactions with local anaesthetics have been generally confined to four
main areas: interactions associated with high doses of noradrenaline, interactions
with anticholinesterases; interactions with suxamethonium; and interactions with
sulphonamides. The risk of such interactions occurring is greatest when the local
anaesthetic is given by injection; however, topical or ophthalmic use could initiate
such interactions if the local anaesthetic reaches appreciable levels in the plasma.

Combination

Interaction

Noradrenalineflocal
anaesthetic (1, 2)
butanilicaine
phosp hatehoradrenaline
procaine phosphate/
noradrenaline
lignocaine/noradrenaline

Fifteen cases of hypertensive episodes, one fatal, have
been reported (1) in which local anaesthetic
preparations containing high doses of noradrenaline (1
in 25 000 = 0.00004 g/ml) were used in dental
anaesthesia. Six of these patients had been
concurrently receiving treatment with tricyclic
antidepressants.
Avoid local anaesthetics with excessively high
concentrations of adrenaline or noradrenaline. The use
of local anaesthetic formulations containing either of
these vasoconstrictor agents is best avoided in patients
on tricyclic antidepressants.

Local
anaesthetidadrenaline
or noradrenaline/
antidepressant (1, 2)
MAOIs
tricyclics

Vasopressor drugs (adrenaline, noradrenaline) in local
anaesthetic preparations may induce hypertensive
episodes in patients being treated with MA01 or
tricyclic antidepressants.
The use of local anaesthetic agents containing either of
these vasoconstrictor agents is best avoided in patients
on antidepressants, especially tricyclic compounds.

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH LOCAL ANAESTHETICS

519

Combination

Interaction

Lignocainel
antiarrhythmic agents
e.g.
procainamide (3)
Lignocainehitrates and
prenylamine lactate (4)

Neurological side effects have been reported
(hallucination and delirium) when these two agents
were given concomitantly.
Two elderly patients treated with sublingual nitrates
and prenylamine for stable angina suffered several
episodes of syncope. Both patients showed a prolonged
QT interval with premature ventricular beats and
torsade de pointes ventricular tachycardia. The male
patient showed sinus rhythm while the female had
sinus bradycardia. After bolus doses of lignocaine
(male, 100 mg; female, 50 mg) both experienced AV
block.
Pacemakers were inserted 3-5 days after withdrawal of
prenylamine; the QT interval returned to normal and
ventricular arrhythmias ceased. In two other patients
with prenylamine-induced tachycardia, lignocaine
neither precipitated AV block nor stopped the
arrhythmias which were treated by pacemaker
overdrive suppression. AV block after i.v. lignocaine is
rare but it is possible that prenylamine and lignocaine
may interact to cause AV conduction delays.

Local anaesthetic/
antibacterials
(sulphonamide) (5)
in particular:
amethocaine
(tetracaine)
benzocaine
butacaine
procaine

Local anaesthetics which are derivatives of p aminobenzoic acid (e.g. amethocaine, benzocaine,
butacaine, procaine) are hydrolyzed in the body to p aminobenzoic acid and should therefore not be used in
patients being treated with sulphonamides.
Sulphonamides exert their antibacterial action by
competitive inhibition of p-aminobenzoic acid in the
micro-organism, thus their activity may be antagonized
by metabolites of these local anaesthetics.

Lignocainelp-blocking
drugs
propranolol (6-9)
metoprolol (7)
nadolol (8)

Significant increases in plasma lignocaine
concentrations have occurred (6-9) during concomitant
therapy with P-blockers such as propanolol (6-9),
metoprolol (7) or nadolol (8), owing to a reduction in
the clearance of lignocaine from plasma. A review (10)
of the available data suggests that the hepatic
metabolism of lignocaine may be reduced as a result of
a fall in hepatic blood flow associated with reduced
cardiac output or it may be caused by a direct
inhibition of hepatic microsomal enzymes. One study

520

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Lignocainelp-blocking
drugs cont.

has suggested that the reduction in clearance with
propranolol is mainly by direct inhibition of
metabolism rather than by lowering of hepatic blood
flow (10).

Procaindecothiopate
(11)

The prolonged ophthalmic use of ecothiopate causes a
reduced plasma pseudocholinesterase level, which
results in reduced hydrolysis of procaine. This effect is
potentially hazardous since it is known that patients
with familial pseudocholinesterase deficiency have
developed severe reactions, including unconsciousness
and cardiovascular collapse, following the injection of
procaine.

Local anaesthetics/
Hz-receptor antagonists
cimetidine, ranitidine
(12-17)

Studies of the effect of H2-receptor antagonists on the
pharmacokinetics of bupivacaine have yielded variable
results. While one group of investigators found that
pretreatment with cimetidine decreases the clearance
of bupivacaine (12), others have failed to find any
significant effect (13, 14). Similarly, pretreatment with
ranitidine has either increased plasma concentrations
of bupivacaine (15) or had no significant effect (14).
Cimetidine (300 mg quid for 1 day) given to six normal
subjects reduced the systemic clearance of lignocaine
(lidocaine) (1mg/kg by 10 min i.v. infusion) from 766
to 47 mYmin; the apparent volume of distribution at
steady state and the degree of plasma protein binding
of lignocaine were also decreased. Five of the 6
subjects noted lignocaine toxicity during the cimetidine
infusion when peak lignocaine concentration was raised
by a mean of 50% (16). The mechanism of this
interaction appears to be multifactorial, involving both
altered distribution and clearance; these are likely to
be due to cimetidine’s known inhibition of oxidative
pathways of biotransformation causing impaired
metabolism of lignocaine and an induced decrease in
liver blood flow via its vasoconstrictor effects on
splanchnic circulation.
Side effects should be anticipated when i.v. lignocaine
is given to patients also receiving cimetidine. The total
dose of lignocaine should be infused slowly or given by

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH LOCAL ANAESTHETICS

Combination

521

Interaction

repeated small doses. Another report (8) cautions
against routine administration of cimetidine to patients
receiving lignocaine unless serum lignocaine levels are
monitored or the dose of lignocaine is adjusted to
counterbalance the enhanced and potentially toxic
effects.
Lignocaine/diuretics
(18)

The effect of lignocaine as an anti-arrhythmic agent is
antagonized by hypokalaemia associated with
acetazolamide, loop diuretics and thiazides.

Lignocaine/plastics
containers (19)

The lignocaine content of buffered cardioplegic
solutions has been reported to decrease when stored in
polyvinylchloride containers at ambient temperature
but not when stored at 4°C (19). This loss appeared to
result from pH-dependent sorption of lignocaine onto
the plastics material and did not occur when lignocaine
solutions were stored in glass bottles.

Lignocaine/smoking
(20, 21)

Smokers had a significantly lower plasma free fraction
of lignocaine than non-smokers (mean: 0.258 vs.
0.307). This 19% increase in protein binding of
lignocaine in smokers may be due to their higher
concentrations of al-acid glycoprotein (20). Another
study showed that the systemic bioavailability of
lignocaine was decreased secondary to a marked
increase in clearance after oral administration,
reflecting an induction of drug-metabolizing activity
(21) *

Local anaesthetic/
suxamethonium
Lignocaine/
suxamethonium (22)

Intravenous lignocaine has been shown to enhance the
neuromuscular blocking action of suxamethonium. This
interaction is thought to be due to lignocaine
displacing suxamethonium from plasma protein binding
sites. In addition lignocaine has anticholinesterase
activity.

Procaine/suxamethonium Intravenous procaine has been shown to enhance the
neuromuscular blocking action of suxamethonium. The
(22)
mechanism of this interaction is two-fold; first,
procaine displaces suxamethonium from plasma

522

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Procaine/suxamethonium proteins; secondly, since procaine and suxamethonium
cont.
are both metabolized by plasma pseudocholinesterase,
large doses of procaine competitively inhibit the
metabolism of suxamethonium. In addition procaine
has anticholinesterase activity.

INTERACTIONS WITH LOCAL ANAESTHETIC AGENTS IN VZTRO
Drug interactions with local anaesthetic agents in vitro due to mixing of injectable
formulations prior to administration can cause particular problems and are therefore
dealt with separately.
Combination

Interaction

Lignocaine/other drugs
in solution (23-26)

Lignocaine hydrochloride is incompatible with the
following drugs in solution causing precipitation of the
other drug:
ampicillin sodium (occasional depending on p H and
vehicle) (23)
amphotericin (24)
cephazolin sodium (25)
methohexitone sodium (26)
phenytoin sodium (27)
sulphadiazine sodium (26)
Avoid these combinations; precipitation may not be
immediately apparent and may develop slowly.

Procaine/other drugs in
solution (28-29)

Procaine solutions are reported to be incompatible
with aminophylline, barbiturates, magnesium sulphate,
phenytoin sodium, sodium bicarbonate and
amphotericin. Solutions should be protected from light
(28).
Degradation of procaine solutions containing
magnesium, sodium, potassium and calcium salts was
found to be temperature dependent. When stored at
6°C the shelf-life of the solution was 5 weeks and this
was increased to 9 weeks when the storage
temperature was - 10°C (29).

Recommended reading
Griffin JP. (1977) Methaemaglobinaemia. Adverse Drug React Toxical Rev 16, 4563.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH LOCAL ANAESTHETICS

523

REFERENCES

1 Boakes AJ et a/. (1972) Br Dent J 133, 137.
2 Editorial. (1972) Lancet ii, 584.
3 Ipyas M et al. (1969) Lancet ii, 1368.
4 Grenadier E et a/. (1982) Postgrad Med J 58, 185.
5 Hartshorn EA. (1969) Drug Intelligence Clin Pharm 3, 131.
6 Ochs HR et al. (1980) N Engl J Med 303, 373.
7 Conrad KA et a/. (1983) Clin Pharmacol Ther 33, 133.
8 Schneck DW et a/. (1984) Clin Pharmacol Ther 36, 584.
9 Bax NDS et al. (1985) Br J Clin Pharamacol 19, 597.
10 Tucker GT et al. (1984) Br J Clin Pharmacoll7, 21s.
11 Zsigmond EK, Eilderton TE. (1968) Can Anaestk Soc J 15, 498.
12 Noble DW et a/. (1987) Br J Anaesth 59, 735.
13 Pihlajamaki KK. (1988) Br J Clin Pharmacol26, 403.
14 Flynn RJ et a/. (1989) Br JAnaesth 62, 87.
15 Wilson CM. (1986) Br J Anaesth 58, 1330P.
16 Feely J et a/. (1982) A n n Intern Med 96, 592.
17 Knapp AB. (1982) J A M A 247, 3174.
18 British National Formulary. (March 1996) No. 31, Appendix 1. British Medical Association and The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London.
19 R Lackner TE et a/. (1983) Am J Hosp Pkarm 40, 97.
20 McNamara PJ et a/. (1980) J Pharm Sci 69, 749.
21 Huet P-M, Lelorier J. (1980) Clin Pkarmacol Ther 28, 208.
22 Usubiaga J E et al. (1967) Anesth Analg Curr Res 46, 39.
23 Reynolds JEF. (ed) (1992) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th edn, Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 1010.
24 Whiting DA. (1967) Br J Derm 79, 345.
25 Kleinberg ML et al. (1980) Am J Hosp Pharm 37, 1087.
26 Riley BB. (1970) J Hosp Pkarm 28, 228.
27 Kirschenbaum HL et al. (1982) Am J Hosp Pkarm 39, 1013.
28 Reynolds JEF (ed). (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th edn, Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 1017.
29 Synave R et a/. (1985) J Clin Hosp Pharm 10, 385.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

11.2. SKELETAL MUSCLE RELAXANTS
I. NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING DRUGS
Muscle relaxants used in anaesthesia are also known as neuromuscular blocking
drugs or myoneural blocking drugs. By specific neuromuscular blockade they enable
lighter levels of anaesthesia to be employed with adequate relaxation of the muscles
of the abdomen and diaphragm. They also relax the vocal cords and thus facilitate
the passage of a tracheal tube. Their action differs from muscle relaxants acting on
the brain or spinal cord which are used in musculoskeletal disorders.

Patients who have received a neurornuscular blocking agent should always have
artijicial ventilation until the agent has been inactivated or antagonized.
1. Non-depolarizing (Curare-like) Agents
Drugs of this group are competitive muscle relaxants and cause blockade by competing with acetylcholine at the receptor site of the neuromuscular junction. These
agents produce neuromuscular blockade ranging from 15 min to 3 hr depending
upon the agent selected.
Depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents should be avoided in patients with
myasthenia gravis.
The action of this group of agents can be reversed with variable sensitivity by
neostigmine. When neostigmine is used to reverse neuromuscular block, atropine
or glycopyrronium should be given before or with the neostigmine to avoid bradycardia, excessive salivation and other muscarinic effects of the neostigmine.
Therapeutic effect

Drug

Alcuronium chloride (4)

Elimination half-life of 3 hr.
The majority (80-85%) of the drug is eliminated by
the kidneys.
Does not have ganglion blocking or histamine releasing
or vagolytic effects.
Neuromuscular block reversed by neostigmine.

525

526

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Therapeutic effect

Drug

Atracurium besylate
(12)

Duration of action 15-35 rnins.
Histamine release may occur.
Atracurium is without vagolytic or sympatholytic
effects.
Degradation is non-enzymic Hofmann elimination.
Action reversed by neostigmine .
Non-cumulative on repeated dosing.

Fazadinium bromide

No longer available.

Gallamine triethiodide
(3)

Has more rapid onset and recovery than tubocurine or
pancuronium.
Causes undesirable tachycardia by vagolytic action.
It should be avoided in patients with severe renal
disease.

Mivacurium (6)

Duration of action about 15 min.
Histamine release can be pronounced.
No significant vagolytic effects.
Prolonged muscle paralysis in patients with atypical or
low plasma pseudocholinesterase.

Pancuronium bromide

(5)

Duration of action 45-60 min, but may be prolonged
in the elderly.
Prolongation of effect is seen in patients with renal
failure.
Does not cause ganglionic blockade or significant
changes in cardiac output.

SKELETAL MUSCLE RELAXANTS

Drug

527

Therapeutic effect

Neuromuscular blockade can be reversed by
neostigmine, together with atropine as an
anticholinergic agent.
Causes a reduction in the partial thromboplastin time
and the prothrombin time as does tubocurarine.
Tubocurarine chloride

(1)

Starts to act between 3-5 min and neuromuscular
block lasts for about 30 min.
May cause erythematous rash on neck and chest due to
histamine release.
Onset of neuromuscular block maybe associated with
hypotension, this is usually transient, but may be
significant in poor risk patients.

Vecuronium (7)

Duration of action 20-30 min.
Large doses may be cumulative.
Does not cause histamine release, sympathetic
blockage or have vagolytic effects.

Atracurium and vecuronium are generally regarded as the agents of choice. Atracurium because of its non-enzymic elimination, and vecuronium because it has by far
the lowest propensity to cause side effects.
Combination

Amphotericin BI
non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blockers
(17-20)
Anaesthetic agents/
non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blockers
(1-9)

Interaction

The hypokalaemia which may occur following
amphotericin therapy enhances the effect of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants.

Alcuronium, atracurium, gallamine, mivacurium,
pancuronium, tubocurarine and vecuronium, have all
been reported to have their action prolonged by the
following general anaesthetic agents ether,
cyclopropane, halothane, ketamine, methoxyflurane,
enflurane, isoflurane, thiopentone and etomidate.

528

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antibiotics1
Non-depolarizing
neuromusuclar blockers
(1-7, 10-17)

Alcuronium, atracurium, gallamine, mivacurium,
pancuronium, tubocurarine and vecuronium, have all
been reported to have their action prolonged by
clindamycin, colistin, kanamycin, neomycin,
polymyxins, streptomycin, tetracyclines, tobramycin,
framycetin, lincomycin, amikacin, gentamicin and
other aminoglycoside antibiotics.

Antidepressantslnondepolarizing
neuromuscular blockers
(5)

The data sheet on pancuronium warns that MA01 can
increase the neuromuscular blocking effect.

Azathioprinelnondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocker
(3, 18)

Azathioprine has been reported to reverse or decrease
neuromuscular blockade by gallamine and other
competitive muscle relaxants. Azathioprine probably
inhibits phosphodiesterase activity at the motor nerve
terminal resulting in increased release of acetylcholine.

Calcium channel
blockerdnondepolarizing
neuromuscular blockers
(19, 20)

Nifedipine and verapamil may interfere with the
release of acetylcholine and enhance the
neuromuscular blocking effects of this class of
neuromuscular blocking drugs. Potentiation of
neuromuscular blockade has been reported and the
block may be resistant to reversal with neostigmine;
edrophonium may be required.

Cardiac anti-arrhythmic Quinidine administration to patients recovering from
agenthon-depolarizing
the effects of tubocurarine leads to recurarization and
neuromuscular blocker
apnoea. Quinidine potentiates both depolarizing and
(3, 11, 21, 23)
non-depolarizing (curare-like) muscle relaxants.
Avoid use of quinidine immediately pre- and
postoperatively, since it can lead to recurarization after
surgery.
Cholinergic agentdnondepolarizing
neuromuscular blockers
(19, 24)

Demecarium and ecothiopate eye drops, neostigmine
and pyridostigmine antagonize the effect of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants; conversely they enhance
the effect of suxamethonium.

SKELETAL MUSCLE RELAXANTS

529

Combination

Interaction

Diazepam/
non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blockers
(25-28)

There are conflicting reports of the effect of diazepam
on neuromuscular blocking agents; potentiation (25) or
antagonism (25) of neuromuscular blocking agents and
a lack of interaction has been reported (26-28).

Diuretics/
non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blockers
Thiazides (29, 30)

Thiazide diuretics increase the reponsiveness to
tubocurarine and gallamine, an effect that appears to
be related to thiazide-induced K+ deficiency.
Avoid K+ depletion prior to elective surgery and, if
possible, withhold the administration of the diuretic.

Frusemide (31-33)

Frusemide may potentiate the effect of tubocurarine
and other non-depolarizing muscle relaxants in renal
failure by depleting serum K+. But antagonism of
tubocurarine by frusemide has also occurred (33).
It is recommended that oral frusemide be discontinued
for 1 week, and parenteral frusemide for 2 days prior
to elective surgery.

Haemostatid
non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blocker
(34)

Aprotinin, a polypeptide derived from bovine lung
tissue, has been implicated in causing apnoea in
patients who had recently received suxamethonium or
tubocurarine. The mechanism is unknown.
Avoid the use of aprotinin in patients who have
received skeletal muscle relaxants during the previous
2 or 3 days.

Imidazoles/
non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blockers

The data sheet on pancuronium draws attention to the
fact that the neuromuscular blocking effect may be
enhanced by imidazoles and metronidazole.

(5)

Lithium/
non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blocker
(2, 35)

Lithium has been reported to potentiate the
neuromuscular blocking effects of atracurium and
pancuronium,

530

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Drugs with local
anaesthetic propertied
non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blocker
(1)

Drugs with local anaesthetic properties including
quinidine, P-adrenergic blocking agents, phenytoin,
and penicillamine have been reported to increase the
effect of alcuronium.

Magnesium salts/
non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blocker
(36)

Parenteral magnesium enhances the effect of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockers such as
tubocurarine .

Narcotic analgesics/
non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blocker
(4)

Narcotic analgesics depress respiratory function and
have an adverse effect on recovery of spontaneous
respiration after anaesthesia where neuromuscular
blockers have been used.

2. Depolarizing Muscle Relaxants
Suxamethonium Bromide
Suxamethonium is the only commonly used agent in this group. With a 5-min
duration of action it is ideal for the passage of a tracheal tube, but may be used in
repeated dosage for longer procedures.
It acts by mimicking acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction, but disengagement from the receptor site is slower than for acetylcholine; depolarization is
therefore prolonged and neuromuscular blockade results.
Suxamethonium should always be given after induction of anaesthesia since depolarization of the muscles causes fasciculation or even a painful twitching.
Recovery from suxamethonium block is spontaneous, but unlike non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blockers it cannot be reversed by neostigmine.
Suxamethonium is contraindicated in severe liver disease, and in burns patients.
Premedication with atropine is desirable.
Prolonged muscle paralysis may occur in patients with atypical or low plasma
cholinesterase enzymes.
When repeated doses of suxamethonium have been used, dual block may occur.
This is caused by a non-deplolarizing block following the recovery from the depolarizing block. Dual block is diagnozed by giving a short-acting anticholinesterase such
as edrophonium; if an improvement occurs this is diagnostic of a secondary nondepolarizing block and neostigmine should be given. Artificial ventilation should
be continued until full muscle function is restored.
Post-operative pain and stiffness may occur after administration of depolarizing
neuromuscular blocking agents.

SKELETAL MUSCLE RELAXANTS

Combination

531

Interaction

Anticholinesterase/
suxamethonium
ecothicopate (37-42)

Prolonged use of ecothiopate eye drops in the
treatment of glaucoma causes diminished serum
cholinesterase levels. Thus prolonged apnoea and
death have been reported with the administration of
suxamethonium to patients with ecothiopate-induced
depression of serum pseudocholinesterase .

Antineoplastic
agentshxamethonium
(19, 43-45)

Cyclophosphamide, thiotepa, mustine and tretamine
lower the serum pseudocholinesterase level possibly by
alkylation of the enzyme and may give rise to
prolonged apnoea if suxamethonium or other
depolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs are given.
Check level of serum pseudocholinesterase in patients
on such antineoplastic treatment; if levels are low,
avoid the use of suxamethonium or other depolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drug. If suxamethonium is
necessary in such cases, use with extreme caution.

Digitalis glycosides/
suxamethonium
(19, 46-48)

Suxamethonium appears to potentiate the cardiac
effects of digitalis glycosides with respect to both
conduction and ventricular irritability. Cardiac
arrhythmias have occurred when suxamethonium has
been administered to digitalized patients.
Suxamethonium should not be used in digitalized
patients unless absolutely necessary; neuromuscular
blocking agents other than suxamethonium should be
used.

Histamine Hz
antagonists/
suxamethonium (49-51)

There are conflicting reports on the effect of
cimetidine on the neuromuscular blocking activity of
suxamethonium: prolonged paralysis (49) and lack of
interaction (50) have been reported. Famotidine and
ranitidine have been reported not to interact with
suxamethonium (51).

Lithiudsuxamethonium
(51)

Prolonged neuromuscular block has been reported
following re-use of muscle relaxants in patients
receiving lithium.

532

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Znteraction

Metoclopramide/
suxamethonium (50, 52)

Dose-dependent prolongation of suxamethoniuminduced neuromuscular block has been reported in
patients given metoclopramide. The potent inhibitory
effect of metoclopramide on pseudocholinesterase may
account for this interaction.

Monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAOI)/
suxamethonium (53)

Phenelzine has been reported to cause a reduction in
the level of plasma pseudocholinesterase. Prolonged
apnoea in a patient on phenelzine has been reported
after suxamethonium administration. There is no
evidence at present that other MAOIs affect
pseudocholinesterase.
Caution should be exercized in administering
suxamethonium (or other depolarizing muscle relaxant)
to patients on phenelzine or other antidepressant of
the MA01 type.

11. AGENTS PRODUCING MUSCLE RELAXATION BY MECHANISMS OTHER
THAN AT THE NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION
Baclofen
Carisoprodol
Chlorphenesin carbamate
Chlorzoxazone
Cyclobenzaprine hydrochloride
Dantrolene sodium
Mephenesin and mephenesin carbamate
These drugs are used in the treatment of muscle spasms; they diminish skeletal
muscle tone and involuntary movement by a selective action on the CNS. Baclofen
has been reported to have a predominantly spinal action and dantrolene is thought
to have a direct action on muscle fibres of this grouping.
Baclofen is an antispastic agent acting at the spinal level. It is a y-aminobutyric acid
derivative. Baclofen depresses monosynaptic and polysynaptic reflex transmission,
probably by stimulating GABA receptors. Neuromuscular transmission is unaffected by baclofen (54).
Dantrolene produces relaxation of contracted skeletal muscle by affecting the contractile response at a site beyond the myoneural junction. It is thought to produce

SKELETAL MUSCLE RELAXANTS

533

a dissociation of excitatiodcontraction coupling, probably by interfering with the
release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
The use of dantrolene with hepatotoxic agents should be avoided. There is some
evidence that hepatic injury is more likely in patients using concomitant oestrogen
(presumably in the form of the contraceptive pill or in hormone replacement therapy, HRT) (55).

Diazepam and quinine also have a role in the treatment of muscle spasm and night
cramps.

Combination

Interaction

ACE inhibitorshaclofen
(19)

Enhanced hypotensive effect, hypotension is a
common side-effect of baclofen.

Alcoholhaclofen
(19, 24)

Enhanced sedative effect.

Antidepressantshaclofen
(56-58)

Enhanced muscle relaxant effect.
Nortriptyline and imipramine, separately, apparently
potentiated the antispastic effect of baclofen in one
patient. Prior treatment for 18 months with baclofen
produced good relief of spasticity and left the patient
with sufficient muscle tone to stand. However, 50 mg
nortriptyline daily at bed time after 6 days caused
increased weakness of the legs and he was unable to
stand. Muscle tone returned after withdrawal of
nortriptyline. Two weeks later imipramine 75 mg daily
caused the same loss of muscle tone. This also abated
within 2 days of withdrawal of the tricyclic. The
mechanism of this interaction is uncertain although a
number of possibilities have been suggested including a
simple additive effect, an unmasking of pre-existing
paresis as spasticity is diminished, displacement of
baclofen from protein binding sites (this is unlikely
since baclofen is not highly protein bound, whilst
tricyclics are), or a pharmacodynamic interaction
affecting neurotransmitters.

534

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Antihypertensives/
baclofen (19)

Enhanced hypotensive effect.

Lithiumhaclofen
(19, 24, 54)

Lithium enhances the muscle relaxant effect of
baclofen. Baclofen possibly enhances lithiumassociated hyperkinesis.

Levodopa + carbidopal
baclofen (54)

There have been reports of mental confusion,
hallucinations and agitation in patients receiving this
combination of muscle relaxant and anti-parkinson
therapy.

Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory
agentshaclofen (54)

NSAIDS which produce renal damage including
ibuprofen reduce baclofen excretion leading to toxicity.

REFERENCES

1 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 5089 (tubocurarine),
2 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications, London, p. 1212
(atracurium) .
3 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications, London, p. 1252
(gallamine).
4 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 128990 (alcuronium).
5 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 344
and 706 (pancuronium).
6 ABPZ Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications, London, p. 1198
(mivacurium).
7 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications, London, pp. 106163 (vecuronium).
8 AMA Drug Evaluations. (1971) General Anaesthetics, 1st edn, pp. 151-60.
9 Cannon JE et al. (1987) Anesthesiology 67, 503.
10 Hussar DA. (1967) A m J Pharm 139, 215.
11 McIver AK. (1967) Pharm J 199, 205.
12 Schou J. (1986) In: D’Arcy PF, Griffin JP (eds) Iatrogenic Diseases, 3rd edn, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp. 527-52.
13 Koch-Weser J et al. (1970) Ann Intern Med 72, 857.
14 Polhmann G. (1966) JAMA 196, 181.
15 Parisi AF, Kaplan MH. (1965) JAMA 194, 298.
16 Levene R A et al. (1969) J Mount Sinai Hosp 36, 380.
17 Pittinger CB et al. (1970) Anesth Analg Curr Res 49, 487.
18 Gramstad L. (1987) Br J Anaesth 59, 995.
19 British National Formulary. (1996) No. 31, Appendix 1. British Medical Association and
The Royal Pharmaccutical Society of Great Britain, London.
20 Van Poorten J F et al. (1984) Anesth Analg 63, 155.

SKELETAL MUSCLE RELAXANTS

535

21 Way WL et al. (1967) JAMA 200, 153.
22 Schmidt JL et al. (1963) JAMA 183, 669.
23 Cuthbert MF. (1966) Br J Anaesth 38, 775.
24 Reynolds JEF (ed). (1993) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopeia, 30th edn, pp. 1201,
1210 and 1212.
25 Feldman SA, Crawley BE. (1970) Br Med J 2, 336.
26 Driessen JJ et al. (1986) Acta Anesthesiol Scand 30, 642.
27 Bradshaw EG, Maddison S. (1979) Br J Anaesth 51, 955.
28 Asbury AJ et al. (1981) Br J Anaesth 53, 859.
29 Goddard JE, Phillips OC. (1965) Pa Med 68, 48.
30 Sphire RD. (1964) Anesth Analg Curr Res 43, 690.
31 Reyes E, Appelt GD. (1972) J Pharm Sci 61, 562.
32 Miller RD et al. (1976) Anesthesiology 45, 442.
33 Azar I et al. (1980) Anesth Analg 59, 55.
34 Chasapakis G, Dimas C. (1966) Br J Anaesth 38, 838.
35 Borden H et al. (1974) Can Anaesth Soc J 21, 79.
36 Ghoneim MM, Long JP. (1970) Anesthesiology 32, 23.
37 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1994-95) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, pp.
517-519 (ecothiopate).
38 Cavallard RJ et al. (1968) Anesth Analg Curr Res 47, 570.
39 Lipson ML et al. (1969) Arch Ophthalmol82, 830.
40 Kinyon GE. (1969) N Engl J Med 280, 53.
41 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin. (1964) 2, 18.
42 Himes JA et al. (1967) Am J Vet Assoc 151, 54.
43 Smith RM Jr et al. (1968) Anesth Analg Curr Res 48, 205.
44 Walker IR et al. (1972) Aust NZ J Med 3, 247.
45 Zsigmond EK, Robins G. (1972) Can Anaesth Soc J 19, 75.
46 Dowdy EG et al. (1965) Anesth Anal Curr Res 44,608.
47 Birch AA et al. (1969) JAMA 210, 490.
48 Bartolone RS, Rao TLK. (1983) Anaesthesiology 58, 567.
49 Kambam JR et al. (1987) Anesth Analg 66, 191.
50 Turner DR et al. (1989) Br J Anaesth 63, 348.
51 Hill GE et al. (1976) Anesthesiology 44, 439.
52 Kao YJ et al. (1990) Br J Anaesth 65, 220.
53 Bodley PO et al. (1969) Br Med J 3 , 510.
54 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium. (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p. 215
(baclofen).
55 ABPI Data Sheet Compendium, (1996-97) Data Pharm Publications Ltd, London, p. 836
(dantrolene).
56 Silverglat MJ et al. (1981) JAMA 245, 1659.
57 Krieg N et al. (1983) Br J Anaesth 52 (Suppl l ) , 33s.
58 Foldes FF et al. (1983) Br J Anaesth 52 (Suppl l), 64s.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 12
Drug Interactions with Herbal Remedies
INTRODUCTION
The use of natural (herbal) and other non-orthodox medicines is a persistent aspect
of present-day health care and Europeans alone are thought to spend the equivalent
of US $500-600 millions/year on natural remedies and food supplements. Many
consumers believe that naturalness is a guarantee of harmlessness and have no
qualms in taking traditional herbal medicines as well as their own prescribed conventional medicines. In the United Kingdom, and elsewhere in Europe, many immigrant races have their own traditional medicine practices, which they frequently
combine with orthodox medical care. Generally too little is known about the consequences of such combinations although the clinical reports of interactions that
infrequently appear in the medical and pharmaceutical press suggest that many
more interactions may be occurring that are not realized as such and are not
reported in the litrature.
Although herbal medicines are by far the largest component of non-orthodox
remedies they do not have exclusive claims; it must be made clear that there are
various types of other alternative treatments ranging from preparations of animal
origin, to minerals, vitamins and amino acids. The following table is restricted to
interactions with herbal medicines, interactions between minerals, vitamins and
orthodox medicines have been reviewed in Chapter 15 (Nutrient-drug interactions)
and also by other reviewers (1, 2).
It must be appreciated that the quality control over most herbal remedies, which
are not officially registered as medicines, is often poor and more likely to be nonexistent, and that most herbal preparations are not standardized for potency in
biological test systems. As a consequence their potency may vary considerably from
sample to sample. Furthermore they may be contaminated or adulterated with
undeclared pesticides, toxic metals, botanicals, animal substances andor orthodox

537

538

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

drugs which may lead to additional and unexpected adverse drug reactions and
interactions (3-6).
Combination

Interaction

BanisteriopidPyschotriu
leaves

In South America a hallucinogenic drink called
‘ayahuasca’ is prepared from Banisteriopis vines and
Pyschotria leaves. The former yields p-carotene
alkaloids, but these are only hallucinogenic in high
doses. The Banisteriopis alkaloids are potent reversible
MAOIs and selectively inhibit MAO-A. The addition
of Pyschotria leaves provides the alkaloid
dimethyltryptamine which is hallucinogenic in low
parenteral doses. The oral dimethyltryptamine would
be inactivated by MAO-A but the presence of the
Banisteriopsis P-carbolines in the drink prevents this
degeneration (7, 8).

Berberine/tetracycline

This alkaloid is derived from the roots and bark of the
plant Berberis aristata; extracts of the plant have been
used as antidiarrhoeal medication in Ayurvedic
medicine in India and in the traditional medicine of
China for the past 3000 years. A Burmese study on the
clinical effects of berberine alone in watery diarrhoea,
namely the reputed antisecretory and vibriostatic
effect, showed that it did not benefit the duration of
diarrhoea, the frequency of stools and fluid
requirements for dehydration, nor did it produce a
notable antisecretory effect. Clinically, patients with
cholera given tetracycline plus berberine were more ill,
suffered longer from diarrhoea and required greater
volumes of intravenous fluid than did those given
tetracycline alone (9).

Betel nut (Areca
catechu)/neuroleptics

Two chronic schizophrenic patients who were
maintained on depot neuroleptics developed serious
extrapyramidal symptoms after a period of heavy betel
nut chewing. The mechanism was suggested as
antagonism of the neuroleptics by the active alkaloid
ingredient of the betel nut (arecoline) (10).

Anti-asthma drugs

Betel nut chewing has been included among the factors
that dispose to asthma severity and its unsatisfactory
control by orthodox medicines in Asians residing in the

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH HERBAL REMEDIES

Cornbination

539

Interaction

UK. It is suggested that arecoline, or another alkaloid
in betel nut, for example guvacoline, may have a
cholinergic bronchoconstrictor effect (11).
Caffeine containing
herbs/4-quinolones and
fluoroquinolones

The hepatic metabolism of caffeine is inhibited, its
elimination half-life increased and its clearance
decreased by certain antibacterial 4-quinolones and
fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin, enoxacin, pipemidic
acid and temafloxacin) (12-15). Users of caffeinecontaining beverages and herbals should be advised
that they have an increased risk of adverse effects (e.g.
tremor, tachycardia, insomnia, CNS excitation) when
they take such quinolines. The most important herbal
remedies which contain substantial amounts of caffeine
are derived from Cola, Zlex and Puulliniu species (16).

Cola nuuantipyrine

An extensive study of factors affecting antipyrine in
West African villagers showed that cola nut
consumption inhibited antipyrine metabolism and
prolonged its half-life by 3.5 hr. It was suggested that
unidentified constituents of cola nuts competed with
antipyrine for oxidation by the microsomal enzyme
system (17). However, other work in Caucasian males
failed to show any effect on antipyrine disposition,
Genetic factors may therefore be of importance (18).

Copn'nus atramentariusl
alcohol

The ink cap fungus is a component of some health
foods. It contains bis(diethylthiocarbamoy1) disulphide,
which is disulfiram, the active component of Antabuse.
Ink cap reacts with small amounts of ingested alcohol
to give unpleasant symptoms of systemic reactions
(hypotension, nausea, sweating, facial flushing,
throbbing headache, tachycardia, accelerated and
deepened respiration and giddiness) (19, 20).

Dietary fibres
braddigoxin

Digoxin bioavailability is decreased by almost 20%
when given with a high-fibre meal (21, 22).

Bradiron

The bioavailability of dietary iron is reduced by bran
(23) *

540

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Bran plus psyllum
biscuits/riboflavine

Absorption of riboflavine is reduced by 6.4% (24).

Ispaghula husMithium
salts

Blood lithium concentration in a psychiatric patient
treated with lithium salts fell to below acceptable levels
when ispaghula husk (one teaspoonful in water twice
daily) was taken (25).

Pectin or bradovastin

Concomitant fibre intake may decrease the absorption
of the lipid-lowering agent lovastin. Patients showed
greatly increased low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
levels when these agents were introduced into a lipidlowering diet plus lovastin; levels normalized when the
fibres were stopped (26).

High-fibre diet/tricyclic
anti-depressants

Excessive dietary fibre may reduce the efficacy of
tricyclic antidepressants. Three patients with recurrent
major depression became refractory to therapy after
ingesting a high-fibre diet. Serum antidepressant levels
were lower than those previously achieved (27).

Eucalyptus species

A number of studies have demonstrated the eucalyptus
leaves, its oil and active principle, eucalyptol, can
induce microsomal enzyme activity in both in vitro and
in vivo tests (28, 29). However, there have not been
any recorded interactions between eucalyptus and
orthodox drugs at the clinical level.
Eucalyptus oil is a significantly toxic substance;
poisoning affects the CNS (loss of consciousness,
hypoventilation and convulsions), the gastrointestinal
system (abdominal pain, vomiting and diarrhoea) and
the respiratory system (pneumonitis and
bronchospasm). The oil is readily available in
Australian households and ingestion by young children
is not uncommon (30).

Garlic (Allium sativum)l
anticoagulants

Since garlic can reduce human platelet aggregation in
vitro (31) it is difficult to exclude the possibility of
untoward effects in patients taking anticoagulants Two
cases have been reported of increased international
normalized ratios in patients previously stabilized on
warfarin: the altered anticoagulation uicture was
v

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH HERBAL REMEDIES

Combination

541

Interaction

attributed to the ingestion of garlic products (pearls or
garlic tablets). Their clotting times were roughly
doubled (32).
However, an earlier review of the literature failed to
disclose reports of an interaction between warfarin and
garlic or any firm data on prolongation of prothrombin
times by garlic (33). Nonetheless, other authors have
warned that drugs, such as agents in garlic, which
cause alterations in platelet function, may potentiate
warfarins action even though the prothrombin time
remains unchanged (34). The present situation about
this possible interaction is unclear.
Ginseng (Panax
ginseng)/phenelzine

The concurrent use of ginseng and the MA01
phenelzine has been associated with adverse effects in
two patients (35, 36). However, commercial ginseng
preparations are not always derived from Panax
ginseng and it is difficult to incriminate this official
source plant in the interaction.

Digoxin

Serum digoxin levels were raised (from 0.9 and 2.2
mmol/l to 5.2 mmoV1) by ingestion of ginseng in a
patient who had been maintained well on digoxin for
10 years. When the patients digoxin dose was
decreased and finally discontinued after 10 days, the
serum digoxin levels remained high for a further 2
weeks. Once ginseng was stopped, serum levels of
digoxin returned to normal when digoxin treatment
was re-introduced. Rechallenge with ginseng resulted
again in elevation of serum digoxin levels. Ginseng
contains eleutherosides, which are chemically related
to cardiac glycosides, and it was suggested that some
component of the ginseng may have been converted to
digoxin. However, since the patient remained
asymptomatic during the interaction, it was suggested
that the serum assay for digoxin had detected a
compound in ginseng that gave a false reading (37).

Grapefruit juice/Ca
antagonists, cyclosporin,
caffeine, coumarinyielding herbs

Grapefruit juice (but not other citrus juices) greatly
augments the bioavailability of the antihypertensive
calcium antagonists, felodipine nifedipine, nitrendipine
and nisoldipine (38-42), the bioavailability of

542

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Grapefruit juice/Ca
antagonists cont.

cyclosporin (43, 44) and has similar results on the
clearance of caffeine (46). It also inhibits the 7hydroxylation of coumarins (47), this implies that
grapefruit juice may interfere with the
pharmacokinetics of coumarin-yielding medicinal herbs
such as: Melilotus oficinalis (sweet clover), Asperula
odorata (sweet woodruff), Dipteryx odorata (tonka
bean and Anthoxanthum odoratum (sweet vernal grass)
(48-50).

Terfenadine

Taking the antihistaminic, terfenadine, with a large
glass of fresh grapefruit juice markedly increased the
area under the plasma levelltime curve (AUC) in six
subjects who were previously shown to be poor
metabolizers of terfenadine. Levels increased up to five
times with the greatest effect around 4-5 hr after the
dose (51-53). This interaction is currently being
investigated by the UK Medicines Control Agency as
possible interaction between the juice and oestrogens
(54) *
A similar interaction has been reported between
grapefruit juice and oral but not intravenous
midazolam, nifedipine and cyclosporin, which
suggested that the site of the flavonoid effect was the
gastrointestinal tract. A further study has shown that
grapefruit juice delayed absorption of the antiarrhythmic agent, quinidine, in healthy subjects and
that it inhibited the metabolism of quinidine to 3hydroxyquinidine and delayed the time to reach
maximum plasma concentration (53).

Oestrogens

Midazolam

Quinidine

Guar gum/
glibenclamide,
metformin,
phenoxymethylpenicillin

The absorption of concomitantly administered drugs
may be affected. The absorption of glibenclamide (55),
metformin (56), and phenoxymethylpenicillin (57) may
be significantly reduced.

Kampo medicined
prednisolone

Oriental Kampo medicines often contain glycyrrhizin,
and these have been reported to influence
prednisolone pharmacokinetics. Three Kampo
remedies which also contained Saiko (Bupleuri radix)
and were commonly administered with prednisolone in

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH HERBAL REMEDIES

Combination

543

Interaction

the treatment of asthma, nephrotic syndrome and
collagen disease, had a variable and different effect on
prednisolone pharmacokinetics in healthy subjects.
One of the three remedies had a steroid-sparing effect
due to decreased 11P-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
(11P-HSD) activity. The other two increased or did
not change the activity of this enzyme. Interestingly,
the authors attributed the enzyme inhibitory effect not
to glycyrrhizin, which was present in the three
Kampos, but to magnolol which was only present in
the Kampo with a positive effect on prednisolone
metabolism (58). Follow-up work confirmed that
magnolol might contribute to the inhibitory effects of
magnolol on prednisolone metabolism through
inhibition of 11P-HSD (59).
Karela (Momordica
charantia)l
chlorpropamide

It has long been established that oral preparations of
this oriental folk remedy have hypoglycaemic activity
in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients (60).
Interference with conventional treatment of diabetes
by diet and chlorpropamide has been observed (61). It
has also been reported that a subcutaneously injected
principle obtained from the fruit may have a
hypoglycaemic effect in insulin-dependent diabetics
(62)

Kyushiddigoxin

A traditional component of this Chinese medicine is
the venom of the Chinese toad (Bufo bufo
gurgurizans). The venom contains bufalin and
cinobufaginal which are chemically similar to digoxin.
The preparation may therefore interfere with digoxin
immunoassays, the constituents can react with digoxin
antibodies and create a false impression of high plasma
digoxin levels (63-67).

Liquorice/
anti-hypertensives

Liquorice (root or extract) may be ingested in
confectionery, soft drinks, medicines or chewing
tobacco. It has mineralocorticoid effects due to the
saponin glycoside, glycyrrhizin, which results in Na+
and water retention and the development of
hypokalaemia (68, 69), oedema and hypertension (70,
71). These effects are thought to be due to inhibition

544

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Liquorice/
anti-hypertensives cont.

of 11P-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase by glycyrrhetinic
acid (a metabolite produced by the hydrolysis of
glycyrrhizin) resulting in increased concentrations of
cortisol in the body (69-73). The control of
hypertension may be difficult.
Hypokalaemia and Na+ caused by liquorice in a
laxative preparation was associated with flaccid
quadriplegia in a 70-year-old woman (74). The
diagnosis was confirmed by challenge with controlled
administration of the laxative. The safe upper limit of
glycyrrhizin is often considered to be in the range of
150-200 mg/day , as liquorice intoxication is usually
associated with daily amounts exceeding these levels.
An intravenous infusion of the active principle,
glycyrrhizin, increased the total and free plasma
concentation of prednisolone and influenced the
pharmacokinetics of prednisolone in man (75). The
AUC of prednisolone was significantly increased, the
total plasma clearance was significantly reduced and
the mean residence time was significantly prolonged.
There was, however, no evident change in the volume
of distribution. It has been suggested that this
combination would be advantageous in the treatment
of rheumatoid conditions. The basis of the interaction
has been suggested as an inhibition of the metabolism
of the steroid by microsomal enzymes. There is
experimental evidence that glycyrrhizin and
glycyrrhetinic acid can inhibit 5-a, 5-p and 1lPdehydrogenase reductase (76, 77).

Prednisolone

Picrorhiza kurroal
methoxsalen

The rhizomes of this plant species is thought to
potentiate the photochemotherapeutic effects of
methoxsalen in human patients with vitiligo (78).

Piperine/various drugs
e.g.
phenytoin
propranolol
rifampicin
sulphadiazine
tetracycline
theophylline

Several studies show that piperine, a major alkaloid of
Piper longum and P. nigrum, both of which occur in
Ayurvedic formulations, can enhance the bioavailability of orthodox drugs such as: phenytoin, propranolol, rifampicin, sulphadiazine, tetracycline and theophylline. Among the suggested mechanisms are promotion of gastrointestinal absorption, inhibition of drug
metabolism and a combination of the two (79-84).

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH HERBAL REMEDIES

545

Combination

Interaction

Psilocybe semilanceatal
alcohol, psychoactive
drugs

Forty-nine patients were admitted to a Glasgow
hospital after the deliberate ingestion of ‘magic
mushrooms’. This gill fungus contains psychoactive
substances such as psilocybin and psilocin, which can
act on indoles in the CNS to produce symptoms that
can mimic acute toxicity and schizophrenic states (85).
The effect is potentiated by alcohol and there is
obviously a serious risk of interaction with other
psychoactive drugs that may be taken concomitantly.

Shankhapusphi/
phenytoin

Two epileptic patients taking phenytoin experienced
unexpected loss of seizure control and a reduction in
plasma phenytoin levels when they took this herbal
preparation, which is a non-alcoholic syrup prepared
from six herbs: Centella asiatica, Convolvulus
pluricaulis, Nardostachys jatamansi, Nepeta elliptica,
Nepeta hindostana and Onosma bracteatum. A followup study in animals confirmed these effects.
Paradoxically Shankhapusphi itself showed
antiepileptic activity (electroshock seizure prevention)
when compared with placebo (86).

Sparteine-containing
herbs1
quinidine,
haloperidol
moclobemide
tricyclic and SSRIs
antidepressants

Sparteine is a quinolizidine alkaloid from Cytisus
coparius which was recently found in a herbal slimming
remedy in the UK. Substantial doses of this
preparation in slow metabolizers could be expected to
be associated with many adverse reactions including
circulatory collapse (87). Quinidine is a potent
inhibitor of the oxidative metabolism of sparteine (88)
and a similar effect has been observed with haloperidol
(89) and moclobemide (90). In addition, several in
vitro studies have shown that several antidepressants
(tricyclic or SSRIs) inhibited human liver microsomal
P4502D6 (CYP2D6) activity which resulted in a
reduced oxidative conversion of sparteine to
dehydrosparteine (91).

Teasliron

Ordinary tea is sometimes reputed to affect oral iron
absorption (92) and some workers have assessed the
effect of other herbal teas. Freshly prepared rooibos
tea (Aspalathus linearis) did not affect iron absorption
in contrast to ordinary tea (93); anise, mint, caraway,

546

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Teasfiron cont.

cumin, tilia and liquorice promoted the absorption of
iron (92). Other workers dispute that ordinary tea
affects the absorption of pharmacological doses of oral
iron preparations (94).

Teucrium chamaedrysf
clofibrate

Hepatotoxicity has been reported with this herbal
preparation (95); toxicity is attenuated by inducers of
microsomal epoxide hydrolase (such as clofibrate) .

Vitamin K-containing
herbdanticoagulants

Herbal preparations and food supplements containing
appreciable quantities of vitamin K can reduce the
effects of oral anticoagulants (96). Cases of impaired
anticoagulation have been recorded after concomitant
intake of ‘Gon’, a non-orthodox remedy containing
vitamin K1,and also after excessive amounts of green
vegetables (96-101).

Yohimbine/tricyclic
anti-depressants
chlorpromazine
amylobarbital
reserpine
clonidine

This toxic alkaloid from Puusinystuliu yohirnbine causes
hypertension in patients taking tricyclic
antidepressants (102). Its toxicity can be enhanced by
chlorpromazine, and attenuated by amylobarbital or
reserpine (103). Yohimbine may be portrayed in health
foods as a peripheral vasodilator which can potentiate
other blood pressure-lowering agents. In reality,
however, the a-adrenoreceptor antagonistic properties
of the alkaloid will reverse the effects of clonidine and
similar antihypertensives (104).

REFERENCES

1 D’Arcy PF. (1993) Adverse Drug React Toxic01 Rev 12, 147.
2 Welling PG. (1996) In: D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC, Welling PG (eds) Mechanisms of drug
interactions, Springer, Berlin, p. 45.
3 Goldman JA, Myerson G . (1991) Arthritis Rheum 34, 1207.
4 Joseph AM et al. (1991) N Engl J Med 324, 62.
5 De Smet PAGM. (1992) In: De Smet PAGM, Keller K, Hansel R, Chandler RF (eds)
Adverse effects of herbal drugs, Vol 1, Springer, Berlin, p. 1.
6 Capobianco DJ et al. (1993) N Engl J Med 329, 1430.
7 De Smet PAGM. (1985) Ritual enemas and snuffs in the Americas, Forris, Dordrecht.
8 Ott J. (1994) Ayahuasca analogues. Pangaean entheogens. Natural Products, Kennewick.
9 Khin-Maung-U et al. (1985) Br Med J 291, 1601.
10 Deahl M. (1989) Mov Discord 4, 330.
11 Taylor RFH et al. (1992) Lancet 391, 1134.
12 Carbo M et al. (1989) Clin Pharmacol Ther 45, 234.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH HERBAL REMEDIES

547

13 Hardner S et al. (1989) Am J Med 87, 89s.
14 Healy DP et al. (1989) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 33, 474.
15 Mahr G et al. (1992) Clin Pharmacokinet 22 (Suppl l), 90.
16 De Smet PAGM. (1989) In: Dukes NMG, Beeley L (eds) Side effects of drugs annual
13, Elsevier, Amsterdam, p. 442.
17 Fraser HS et al. (1976) Clin Pharmacol Ther 22, 369.
18 Vessel ES et al. (1979) Clin Pharmacol Ther 26, 287.
19 Caley MJ, Clarke RA. (1977) Br Med J 2, 1633.
20 Radford AP. (1978) Br Med J 1, 112.
21 Brown DD et al. (1977) Am J Cardiol39, 297.
22 Reissell P, Manninen V. (1982) Acta Med Scand 668 (Suppl), 88.
23 Rossander L. (1987) Scand J Gastroenterol 129 (Suppl), 68.
24 Roe D A et al. (1988) J Am Diet Assoc 88, 211.
25 Perlman BB. (1990) Lancet 335, 416.
26 Richter WO et al. (1991) Lancet 338, 706.
27 Stewart DE. (1992) J Clin Psychopharmacol 12, 438.
28 Jori A et al. (1969) Biochem Pharmacol 18, 2081.
29 Seawright AA et al. (1972) Aust Vet J 48, 488.
30 Tiballs J. (1995) Med J A u s t 163, 177
31 Bordia AK et al. (1977) Atheroscelerosis 28, 155.
32 Sunter WH. (1991) Pharm J 246, 722.
33 Rocky Mountain Drug Consultation Center. (1986) Micromedex, Denver (Drugdex vol.
61).
34 Serlin MJ, Breckenridge AM. (1983) Drugs 25, 610.
35 Shader RI, Greenblatt DJ. (1985) J Clin Psychopharmacol 5 , 65.
36 Jones BD, Runikis AM. (1987) J Clin Psychopharmacol7, 201.
37 McRae S. (1996) Can Med Assoc J 155, 293.
38 Bailey D G et al. (1989) Clin Znvest Med 12, 357.
39 Bailey D G et al. (1991) Lancet 337, 268.
40 Soons PA et al. (1991) Clin Pharmacol Ther 50, 394.
41 Edgar B et al. (1992) Eur J Clin Pharmacol42, 313.
42 Bailey D G et al. (1993) Clin Pharmacol Ther 54, 589.
43 Ducharme MP et al. (1993) Br J Clin Pharmacol36, 457.
44 Proppe G et al. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 337.
45 Bailey D G et al. (1994) Clin Pharmacokinet 26, 91.
46 Fuhr U et al. (1993) Br J Clin Pharmacol35, 431.
47 Merkel U et al. (1994) Eur J Clin Pharmacol46, 175.
48 Hoppe HA. (1975) Angiospermen, 8th edn, Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 91, 435, 519, 700
(Drogenkunde, vol. 1).
49 Lewis WH, Elvin-Lewis MPF. (1977) Medical botany. Plants affecting manís health,
Wiley, New York, p. 192.
50 Teuscher E, Lindequist U. (1988) Biologie-Chemie-Pharmakologie,
Academie, Berlin,
p. 228.
51 Benton R et al. (1994) Clin Pharmacol Ther 55, 146.
52 Honig PK et al. (1996) J Clin Pharmacol36, 345.
53 Anon. (1996) Pharm J 257, 50.
54 Anon. (1996) Pharm J 257, 313.
55 Neugebauer G et al. (1983) Beitr Infusionsther Klin Ernahrung 12, 40.
56 Gin H et al. (1989) Horm Metab Res 21, 81.
57 Huupponen R et al. (1985) Eur J Clin Pharmacol28, 717.
58 Homma M et al. (1992) 5th World Conference on Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, July 26-31, Yokohama.
59 Homma M et al. (1994) J Pharm Pharmacol46, 305.

548

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

60 Leatherdale BA et al. (1991) Br Med J 282, 1823.
61 Aslam M, Stockley IH. (1979) Lancet i, 607.
62 Khanna P et al. (1981) J Nat Prod 44, 648.
63 Fushimi R et al. (1989) Lancet i, 339
64 Fushimi et al. (1990) Ther Drug Monit 12, 242.
65 Lin C-S et al. (1989) Jpn Circ J 53, 1077.
66 Kwan T et al. (1992) Chest 102, 949.
67 Panesar NS. (1992) Clin Chem 38, 2155.
68 Nielsen I, Pedersen RS. (1984) Lancet i, 1305.
69 Farese RV et al. (1991) N Engl J Med 325, 1223.
70 Blachley JD, Knochel JP. (1980) N Engl J Med 302, 784.
71 Cereda JM et al. (1983) Lancet i, 1442.
72 Edwards CRW (1991) N Engl J Med 325, 1242.
73 Teelucksingh S et al. (1991) Lancet 337, 1549.
74 Cumming AAM et al. (1980) Postgrad Med J 56, 526.
75 Chen M-F et al. (1990) Endocrinol Jpn 37, 331.
76 Tamura Y et al. (1979) Arzneimittelforsch 26, 647.
77 Monder C et al. (1989) Endocrinology 125, 1046.
78 Bedi KL et al. (1989) J Ethnopharmacol 27, 347.
79 Atal CK et al. (1981) J Ethnopharmacol4, 229.
80 Atal CK et al. (1985) J Pharmacol Exp Ther 232, 258.
81 Bano G et al. (1987) Planta Med 53, 568.
82 Bano G et al. (1991) Eur J Clin Pharmacol41, 615.
83 Bhat BG, Chandrasekhara N. (1987) Toxicology 44, 91.
84 Johri RK, Zutshi U. (1992) J Ethnopharmacol37, 85.
85 Young RE et al. (1982) Lancet i, 213.
86 Dandekar UP et al. (1992) J Ethnopharmacol35, 285.
87 Galloway JH et al. (1992) Lancet 340, 179.
88 Schellens JH et al. (1991) Clin Pharmacol Ther 50, 520.
89 Gram LF et al. (1989) Br J Clin Pharmacol27, 272.
90 Gram LF, Brosen K (1993) Br J Clin Pharmacol35, 649.
91 Crewe HK et al. (1992) Br J Clin Pharmacol34, 262.
92 El-Shobaki FA et al. (1990) Z Ernahrung Swiss 29, 264.
93 Hesseling PB et al. (1979) S Afr Med J 55, 631.
94 Koren G et al. (1982) Zsr J Med Sci 18, 547.
95 Loeper J et al. (1994) Gastroenterology 106, 464.
96 Heald GE, Poller L. (1974) Br Med J 2 , 455.
97 Udall JA, Krock LB. (1968) Curr Ther Res 10, 207.
98 Hogan RP. (1983) JAMA 249, 2679.
99 Kempin SJ. (1983) N Engl J Med 308, 1229.
100 Walker FB. (1984) Arch Intern Med 144, 2089.
101 Watson AJM et al. (1984) Br Med J 288, 557.
102 Lacomblez L et al. (1989) Clin Pharmacol Ther 45, 241.
103 Ingram CG. (1962) Clin Pharmacol Ther 3 , 345.
104 De Smet PAGM, Smeets OSNM. (1994) Br Med J 309, 958.

CHAPTER 13
Drug Interactions with Medicinal Plastics
INTRODUCTION
It has been increasingly evident in recent years that the rapid change from glass
containers to the almost universal use of plastics as infusion containers, as well as
for the administration systems, has generated some unforseen adverse effects (1).
The following are the polymer compounds and other materials (medicinal plastics)
that are widely used in plastics pharmaceutical packaging, syringes, filters and
intravenous administration equipment:
Cellulose esters (acetate, nitrate, propionate)
Ethylvinyl acetate
Methacrylate butadiene styrene
Nylon
Polyacrylonitrile
Polybutadiene
Polycarbonate
Polyethylene
Polyolefin
Polypropylene
Polystyrene
Polyurethane
Polyvinyl chloride
Rubber
Silicone
Teflon

549

550

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

ABSORPTION
Plastics materials used in medicine and pharmacy may interact with medicinal
substances principally by absorption (sorption), adsorption and permeation. Of
these mechanisms, absorption into a plastics material is probably the most important
mechanism underlying interactions. For example the sorption of drugs to intravenous fluid containers, delivery sets, syringes, filters and other plastics apparatus has
been well publicized and it is apparent that materials made from polyvinylchloride
(PVC) are the major offenders in this respect. Interactions with other plastics are
rare. Additives present in the plastics materials include plasticizers added to reduce
brittlesness, ultraviolet ray absorbers to prevent degradation by light, and antioxidants and lubricants which are sometimes needed for satisfactory processing. Such
plasticizers may provide an appropriate hydrophobic environment for drug migration. Monomer residues and additives can leach out from the finished plastics
materials and have been reponsible for contamination of container contents (1-6).
Current information suggests that the following drug substances may exhibit
clinically significant sorption to plastics materials: amiodarone, some benzodiazepines including diazepam and lorazepam, chlormethiazole, glyceryl trinitrate (nitroglycerin), hydralazine hydrochloride, insulin, isosorbide dinitrate, lignocaine , phenothiazines, thiopentone sodium, vitamin A acetate and warfarin sodium.
ADSORPTION
The classic example of a drug binding to surfaces is insulin, which has been found
to adsorb equally to glass, PVC or polyethylene. Adsorption may be reduced by
other solutes which complete for the same binding sites (e.g. other proteins like
albumin or gelatin). These facts distinguish adsorption from absorption (sorption).
The major clinically important effect is that, as the adsorption process occurs so
rapidly, doses administered initially are much reduced but, as surfaces become
saturated, the dose of drug received by the patient increases rapidly. Losses can be
minimized by using the high concentration - small container approach to drug
delivery (e.g. a syringe with a high concentration of drug in solution).
LEACHING
Leaching is the migration of substances from the container or packaging materials
into the medicine. A number of drugs, or components of their formulation, cause
the leaching of the plasticizer diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) from PVC bags into
intravenous solutions. These drugs include the antineoplastics teniposide, paclitaxel
(Taxol) and its semisynthetic analogue docetaxel (Taxotere), cyclosporin and miconazole (7, 8).
With teniposide, large amounts of DEHP were extracted from PVC infusion bags
and to minimize patient exposure to this substance teniposide solutions should be
stored in glass or a polyolefin container and delivered through polyethylene-lined
i.v. administrations sets (9).

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH MEDICINAL PLASTICS

551

Paclitaxel and docetaxel are formulated for injection in dehydrated alcohol and
polyoxyethylated castor oil, the latter being known to leach DEHP from PVC
containers and administration sets (10,ll). No DEHP was detected when solutions
were stored in glass or polyolefin containers and infused through polyethylene-lined
administration sets (10). After storage for 19 hr in 1% methanolic aqueous solution,
the concentration of Taxol (paclitaxel) declined to about 40% in glass vials, 67%
in polypropylene tubes, and 55% in siliconized polypropylene tubes. When stored
in polystyrene tissue culture plates the concentration decline to 73% after 24 hr;
no concentration decline was observed in the presence of foetal bovine serum (12).
Cyclosporin and miconazole are also formulated with surfactants when used in
injection solutions and these also leach DEHP from plastics bags and administration
sets. To minimize patient exposure to DEHP these solutions should be infused
immediately after their preparation in PVC bags (8).

PERMEATION
Certain drugs not only absorb into plastics but permeate through the plastics matrix
to be released from the outside surface. Loss of chlormethiazole from PVC sets and
catheter-related thrombophlebitis during chlormethiazole administration through
silicone catheters are probably due to this property (4). Nitrates are thought to
behave in a similar fashion when in contact with PVC and this will greatly contribute
to nitrate loss during parenteral administration (1).
In addition, some drugs have been shown to alter the physical characteristics
of plastics materials, for example, the general anaesthetic gas, cyclopropane, is
incompatible with flexible plastics or rubber tubing; methoxyflurane a volatile anaesthetic is significantly absorbed by the rubber in anaesthetic circuits and it partially
solubilizes PVC plastics. Paraldehyde has long been known to have a solvent action
on rubber, it also solubilizes polystyrene and styrene-acrylo- nitrile copolymer and
therefore should not be injected with syringes made with these materials.
Glass is usually a satisfactory alternative for those drug substances that interact
with plastics, however, there are exceptions. For example, chloroquine binds
strongly onto soda glass (60-70‘70 bound) and insulin is strongly absorbed by laboratory glassware and siliconized glassware (13,14).

CONTACT LENSES
A number of drugs can enter into surface interactions with plastic contact lenses.
A search of the literature has not shown any other examples of this interaction
other than those included in the last edition of this volume. It would seem therefore
that this type of interaction is not a major clinical problem although it is possible
that new interactions have been experienced but not reported. In any event, the
importance of such interactions has greatly diminished due to the development of
single-use ‘disposable’ lenses.

552

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

CONCLUSIONS
The following Table of Drug Interactions gives information on those interactions
between drugs and plastics materials that have clinical significance. No drug should
be added to any intravenous fluid unless it is known that the drug is stable in the fluid
and that it does not interact with the materials of the container or administration
equipment.
Most reports of interactions between drugs and plastics materials have originated
from studies to determine the stability of drugs in plastics containers, syringes,
plastics infusion bags, filters or giving sets. The number of such studies is legion
and it would be impossible for any book of this size to cover even a small percentage
of the number of reports that have appeared in the literature. We do not know of
any specific book that lists these types of interaction and we would therefore direct
any enquirer to the latest editions of the A B P I Data Sheet Compendium,Martindale,
The Extra Pharmacopoeia, or the British National Formulary or other national
reference sources.

Cornbination

Interaction

Plasticdamiodarone

This anti-arrhythmic agent is rapidly sorbed by PVC
infusion bags (losses up to 60% after 5 days) and
administration sets (losses up to 18% after 15 min).
Losses were attributed to the presence of the
plasticizer di-2-ethylhexylphthalate. There were no
losses when stored in glass or rigid polyvinyl chloride
bottles (15).

Plasticdcarbamazepine

There is an apparent loss of carbamazepine during
administration through nasogastric feeding tubes.
Twelve methods of administering carbamazepine
suspension (100 mg/5 ml) were tested; the methods
differing with respect to tube size, presence and type
of diluent, and type of flush solution. Significant loss of
carbamazepine (up to 23.6%) was noted for four of
the six methods in which undiluted suspension was
administered. No significant loss of drug occurred for
any of the methods involving the use of a diluent.
These results indicated that undiluted suspensions
adhere (sorb) to polyvinyl nasogastric feeding tubes
(16). It is important to note that similar problems have
arisen with the administration of phenytoin by this
route (17).
Carbamazepine suspensions should be mixed with an

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH MEDICINAL PLASTICS

Combination

553

Interaction

equal volume of diluent before being administered
through nasogastric feeding tubes.

Plasticdchlormethiazole

Several studies have demonstrated that
chlormethiazole edisylate may permeate through or be
sorbed onto plastics used in intravenous infusion bags
or administration sets (4, 18-20). The drug may also
react with and soften the plastics material (3, 4). The
UK manufacturers recommend the use of a motordriven glass syringe in preference to a plastics drip set
in small children. If a plastics drip set is used in older
patients it should be changed at least every 24 hr. In
all cases Teflon intravenous cannulas should be used.
Chlormethiazole penetrates the walls of silicone
tubing, such as those found in silastic catheters, and
has led to thrombophlebitis along the length of a vein
(5).

Plasticdchloroquine

Various studies, using low concentrations of
chloroquine phosphate or sulphate have shown that
chloroquine exhibits pH-dependent binding to several
materials used in medical equipment and membrane
filters including soda glass, and various plastics, such as
cellulose acetate, cellulose propionate, methacrylate
butadiene styrene, polypropylene, polyvinyl chloride,
ethylvinyl acetate and polyethylene (21-23). Although
this effect may not be of relevance at doses used
clinically (24), it is considered critical that laboratory
workers undertaking assays and sensitivity testing
should recognize that significant reductions in
concentrations can occur when chloroquine solutions
are prepared or stored in equipment made from these
materials (22, 23). As the effect of borosilicate glass or
polystyrene on chloroquine sorption appears to be
minimal, it has been suggested that they be used in
such procedures (22, 23). Similar sorption has been
noted during membrane filtration of other antimalarial
agents including amodiaquine hydrochloride,
mefloquine hydrochloride and quinine sulphate (21).
Both chloroquine and quinine sulphate should be

554

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Plasticdchloroquine
cont.

protected from light as photodegradation will also
cause losses of drug from solution. Mefloquine
hydrochloride has been reported to undergo photolytic
degradation in water (25).

Plasticdcyclosporin

It is common practice to measure serum levels of
cyclosporin to avoid over or under dosage. This has
led to the development of a number of therapeutic
monitoring techniques, e.g. radioimmunoassay, and
HPLC. However, a number of these techniques gave
erroneous cyclosporin levels due to analytical problems
(26). The use of an inappropriate pipette for
manipulating cyclosporin standards led to low
measured concentrations of the drug. This was due to
the pipette having a plastics tip (rather than a glass tip)
to which cyclosporin adsorbed. Sorption was attributed
to the lipophilic nature of cyclosporin and it is now
recommended that serum level monitoring techniques
should use glass apparatus where possible (27).

Plastics/diazepam and
lorazepam

Substantial adsorption of diazepam onto some plastics
materials may cause problems when administering the
drug by continuous intravenous infusion. More than
50% of diazepam in solution may be adsorbed onto
the walls of PVC infusion bags and their use should
therefore be avoided. Administration sets should
contain the minimum amount of PVC tubing and
should not contain a cellulose propionate volumecontrol chamber. Suitable materials for infusion
containers, syringes, and administration sets when
administering diazepam include glass, polyolefin,
polypropylene and polyethylene (24, 28-32).
Lorazepam should not be administered in sodium
chloride or dextrose injections in PVC bags; the
concentration of lorazepam dropped below 90% of the
original concentration when stored in PVC bags. It was
stable for up to 24 hr when stored in glass bottles (33).
Rapid and unacceptable loss (up to 29% in 24 hr) of
lorazepam in PVC bags occurred due to sorption.
Lorazepam loss was greatly reduced in polyolefin bags
(5% loss in 24 hr at room temperature) (34). Further
studies confirmed significant losses due to probable

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH MEDICINAL PLASTICS

Combination

555

Interaction

sorption to PVC bags when admixed in both 5%
dextrose and saline solutions (35, 36).
Plastics/glyceryl
trinitrate

The loss of glyceryl trinitrate (nitroglycerin) from
solution by adsorption or absorption into some plastics
materials used in intravenous infusion equipment (37,
38) and inline filters (39, 40) has been recognized for
some years, although adsorption does not appear to
occur to any great extent with polyolefin (41) or
polyethylene (24, 42, 43). Polypropylene or glass
syringes have been recommended (44). The use of
PVC containers, filters, tubing and administration sets
should be avoided (45).
One study, however, showed that patients who
received i.v. nitroglycerin through a PVC
administration set had the same clinical response as
patients given the drug through a polyethylene set
(46) *
Some commercial formulations of glyceryl trinitrate for
intravenous use may contain substantial quantities of
alcohol in the solvent, and there have been several
reports of alcohol intoxication occuring during highdose glyceryl trinitate infusion (47-49).
A blood alcohol concentration of 2.67 mg/ml was
reported in a patient who required glyceryl trinitrate 2
mg/min. PVC tubing has been used for the infusion
and the authors suggested that adsorption of glyceryl
trinitrate on to the tubing had increased the dose
requirements and thus the amount of alcohol given
(49) *

Plasticdinsulin

Insulin, in common with many polypeptides, may be
strongly sorbed to glassware, to polyethylene and
polyvinyl chloride (13, 50-52).
When insulin solutions are placed into plastics
containers the fraction of insulin bound to the plastic
has been reported to range from 5 to 80% (53). The
sorption of insulin to plastics materials can present
potential problems during the intraperitoneal
administration of insulin to patients being treated with
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis; as much as 65% of
insulin added to 2 1 of dialysis solution was retained by

556

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Plastics/insulin cont.

sorption to the material of the plastics container (54).
The binding of insulin onto glass and plastics used in
administration sets has been decreased by the addition
of albumin or polygeline to insulin solutions. Some
workers consider this to be unnecessary since in their
experience insulin binding is not a major problem (55,
56). Running approximately 10 ml of the insulin
solution through the intravenous tubing before
beginning the infusion has been suggested by some
(57).
Storage of biosynthetic insulin in polypropylene and
propylene-ethylene copolymer syringes for 28 days did
not cause significant insulin loss, but prefilled syringes
should be refrigerated (58).

Plasticdisosorbide
dinitrate

The loss of isosorbide dinitrate from solution during
infusion was found to be 30% with PVC infusion sets,
but negligible when polyolefin or glass delivery sets
were used (59). An earlier study reported up to 50%
loss when stored in plastic infusion bags or in the
isolated burettes, but not during storage in glass
containers over a period of 200 hr (60). Another study
reported a 23% decrease after 24 hr storage at 21°C in
PVC containers; most of the loss occurred within the
first 6 hr. There was no loss of potency when
isosorbide was stored under similar conditions in glass
bottles or polyethylene, nylon, and polypropylene
laminated bags (24).
Continuously infused isosorbide dinitrate with heparin
both have a compatibility problem with PVC tubing.
Isosorbide dinitrate is rapidly fixed on PVC and then
released; it is released earlier when it is administered
with heparin in the tube. Some heparin is lost in the
PVC tubing; this loss is relatively stable with time and
is independent of the type of infusion solvent or
whether heparin is used by itself or in combination
with isosorbide dinitrate (61).

Heparin

Plastics/paraldehyde

Paraldehyde has a solvent action upon rubber,
polystyrene and styrene-acrylonitrile copolymer, and
should not be administered in plastic syringes made
with these materials (62). On re-evaluation of the

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH MEDICINAL PLASTICS

Combination

557

Interaction

compatibility of paraldehyde with plastic syringes and
needle hubs, it was recommended that, if possible, allglass syringes be used for the injection of paraldehyde
or for the measurement of oral doses. Needles with
plastic hubs could be used. The use of polypropylene
syringes with rubber-tipped plastic plungers
(Plastipak), or glass syringes with natural rubbertipped plastic plungers (Glaspak) was acceptable only
for the immediate administration or measurement of
paraldehyde doses (63).

Plasticdpropofol

The anaesthetic propofol is formulated as an oil in
water emulsion for injection. There was a significant
decrease in concentration when the diluted emulsion
was administered via PVC i.v. tubing; this was
dependent upon the flow rate of the infusion (64). One
manufacturer has suggested that it should be
administered into a running i.v. infusion through a Ysite close to the injection site.

Plasticdquinidine
gluconate

Spectrophotometric analysis of quinidine gluconate
solutions in 5% dextrose injection administered via
PVC administration sets revealed a 5-7% reduction in
absorbance, associated with the loss of quinidine from
the infusion bags and a further 34-38% reduction in
absorbance attributable to quinidine absorption by the
PVC tubing. However, with a glass syringe attached to
a short PVC tube and a winged i.v. catheter the loss
was reduced to less than 3%. Apart from absorbance,
leaching of diethylhexyl phthalate could lead to
apparent quinidine loss due to changes in UV light
absorbance (64).

Plastics/vitamin A

A number of studies have shown that vitamin A binds
to plastics, especially PVC, and losses can be as high
as 80% (2, 5 , 66). It is now clear that sorption to bags
and administration sets depends on the ester used.
While the acetate ester is strongly bound, the
palmitate shows little or no tendency to bind to PVC.
Vitamin A (both acetate and palmitate) is sensitive to
light, and light-induced degradation, especially when
passing through administration sets, may account for

558

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Plastics/vitamin A cont.

some of the reported high losses of vitamin A from
solution ( 5 ) . It must be accepted that vitamin A losses
will occur with the acetate during parenteral nutrition,
although not in the refrigerator if light protected. For
example, in one study the amounts of vitamin A
delivered to the patient from glass or PVC containers
were 77 and 71%, respectively, when protected from
light and 61 and 49% when exposed to light (67). The
problem of sorption to PVC or other plastics can be
solved by the use of the palmitate ester. This is more
satisfactory than the empirical alternative of adding a
generous excess of vitamin A acetate to the infusion
fluid to allow for sorption losses. However, the use of
the palmitate ester does not solve the problem of
photodegradation of the vitamin.
Vitamin A tablets stored in PVC blister packs for 6
months showed degradation and loss of content (68).

Plastidvarious drugs in
solution

There have been some reports of studies directed
specifically towards discovering plastics-drug
interactions. In one study of 46 injectable drugs stored
in PVC bags for periods up to 3 months, five drugs
(chlormethiazole edisylate, diazepam, hydralazine
hydrochloride, thiopental sodium and warfarin) were
lost from solution due to substantial sorption after 1
week (3). In a follow-up study, 45 drugs were added to
i.v. infusion fluids and drug loss was studied after
simulated infusion via plastic infusion sets, with and
without burette chambers and glass infusion bottles,
via polyethylene and silastic tubing with glass syringes
on an infusion pump, and via single-use all-plastic
syringes. Chlormethiazole edisylate, chlorpromazine
hydrochloride, diazepam, promethazine hydrochloride,
thiopental sodium, thioridazine hydrochloride and
trifluoperazine dihydrochloride were lost from solution
during infusion through at least one of the systems
(30). The loss of most drugs during infusion was slow,
time-dependent and concentration independent, which
indicated a diffusion-controlled sorption rather than a
binding adsorptive process. Drug loss was lowest in
short lengths of small diameter tubing with low

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH MEDICINAL PLASTICS

Combination

559

Interaction

permeability constants. None of the drugs was lost
when stored in all-plastic, single-use syringes (30).
A further study repeated this type of investigation and
showed that up to 55% of diazepam, 51% of
nitroglycerin, 24% of warfarin sodium, and 22% of
isosorbide dinitrate was lost during 24 hr storage in
PVC bags, but none lost potency when stored in glass
bottle and Clear-Flex bags (polyethylene, Nylon and
polypropylene laminate) (24).
Other workers have dealt specifically with interactions
between selected drugs and plastics syringes since it is
common hospital practice to preload syringes with
drugs and store them ready for use. Four drugs
(dexamethasone sodium phosphate, diazepam,
diatrizoate meglumine and nitroglycerin) were
individually loaded into 3-ml syringes and stored at a
range of temperatures for periods of 6 hr to 30 days.
Drug concentrations were seen to change following
storage, the greatest changes occurred with the highly
lipophilic drugs dexamethasone and diazepam. In most
instances loss of drug was most rapid at room
temperature (69).
Plastic contact lenses/
various drugs
Contact lenses

Some drugs can enter into surface interactions with
plastic contact lenses. For example, an orange
colouration of lenses has been associated with the use
of rifampicin (70), and brown adrenochrome
pigmentation of hydrophilic lenses occurred with three
elderly patients within 2 months of starting topical
treatment with adrenaline hydrochloride or epinephryl
borate (71); lens staining has also been reported with
fluorescein (72). Other authors have reported opaque
deposits in SeeQuence disposable contact lenses in
three patients after treatment with topical ciprofloxacin
and prednisolone acetate (73).
Several papers have reviewed the use of contact lenses
and medicaments that can affect them (74-78).

Intraocular lenses

Other work has investigated the in vitro washout
kinetics of dexamethasone, gentamicin, norepinephrine
and pilocarpine on intraocular lenses of different
materials ranging from hydrogel lenses to

560

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Intraocular lenses cont.

polymethylmethacrylate, Acrysof and silicone lenses,
Chiroflex and A M 0 Sl-18NB. Maximum drug uptake
would only provide one-tenth of the greatest aqueous
humour concentrations that occurs after topical drug
administration (79). Similar in vivo studies showed that
hydrogel intraocular lens did not act as a significant
depot for chloramphenicol and dexamethasone in the
eye (80).
Ramipril should not be used in patients using
polyacrylonitrile (AN69) dialysis membranes or during
low-density lipoprotein aphereis with dextran sulphate.

Ramiprill
polyacrylonitrile
dialysis membranes (81)

REFERENCES

1 Allwood M. (1990) In: Florence AT, Salole EG. (eds) Formulation factors in adverse
reactions, Wright, London, pp. 56-74.
2 Moorhatch P, Chiou WL. (1974) Am J Hosp Pharm 31, 72.
3 Kowaluk E A et al. (1981) Am J Hosp Pharm 38, 1308.
4 Lingam S et al. (1980) Br Med J 280, 155.
5 Allwood MC. (1983) Pharmacy Znt 4, 83.
6 D’Arcy PF. (1983) Drug Zntell Clin Pharm 17, 726.
7 Pearson SD, Trissel LA. (1993) Am J Hosp Pharm 50, 1405.
8 Faouzi MEA et al. (1995) J Pharm Biomed Analysis 13, 1363.
9 Faouzi MA et al. (1994) Znt J Pharm 105, 89.
10 Waugh WN. (1991) Am J Hosp Pharm 48, 1520.
11 Trissel LA et al. (1994) Am J Hosp Pharm 51, 2804.
12 Song D et al. (1996) J Pharm Sci 85, 29.
13 Ferrebee JW et al. (1951) Endocrinology 48, 277.
14 McElnay JC, Hughes CM. (1996) In: D’Arcy PF, McElnay JC, Welling PG. (eds)
Mechanisms of drug interactions, Springer, Berlin, pp. 249-278.
15 Weir SJ et al. (1985) Am J Hosp Pharm 42, 2679.
16 Clark-Schmidt AL et al. (1990) Am J Hosp Pharm 47, 2034.
17 Cacek AT et al. (1986) Am J Hosp Pharm 43, 689.
18 Tsuei SE et al. (1980) Eur J Clin Pharmacol 18, 333.
19 Kowaluk EA et al. (1984) J Pharm Sci 73, 43.
20 Lee MG. (1986) Am J Hosp Pharm 43, 1945.
21 Baird JK, Lambros C. (1984) Bull W H O 62, 439.
22 Yahya AM et al. (1985) Znt J Pharm 25, 217.
23 Yahya AM et al. (1986) Znt J Pharm 34,137.
24 Martens HJ et al. (1990) Am J Hosp Pharm (1990) 47, 369.
25 Tonnesen HH, Grislingaas A-L. (1990) Znt J Pharm 60, 157.
26 Shaw LM et al. (1987) Clin Chem 36, 1841.
27 McMillan M. (1989) Pharmacol Ther 42, 135.
28 Cloyd JC et al. (1980) Am J Hosp Pharm 37, 492.
29 Parker WA, MacCara ME. (1980) Am J Hosp Pharm 37, 496.
30 Kowaluk E A et al. (1982) Am J Hosp Pharm 39, 460.
31 Kowaluk E A et al. (1983) Am J Hosp Pharm 40, 417.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH MEDICINAL PLASTICS

561

32 Reynolds JEF (ed). (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn, Pharmaceutical Press, London, p. 700.
33 McGuire TR et al. (1993) Am J Hosp Pharm 50, 1410.
34 Trissel LA, Pearson SD. (1994) Am J Hosp Pharm 51, 368.
35 Mancano MA et al. (1995) Am J Health System Pharmacy 52, 2213.
36 Hoey LL et al. (1996) Ann Pharmacother 30, 343.
37 Crouthamel WG et al. (1978) N Engl J Med 299, 262.
38 Roberts MS et al. (1980) J Pharm Pharmacol32, 237.
39 Baaske DM et al. (1980) Am J Hosp Pharm 37, 201.
40 Kanke M et al. (1983) Am J Hosp Pharm 40, 1323.
41 Wagenknecht DM et al. (1984) Am J Hosp Pharm 41, 1807.
42 Schaber DE et al. (1985) Drug Intell Clin Pharm 19, 572.
43 Tracy TS et al. (1989) Am J Hosp Pharm 46, 2031.
44 Driver PS et al. (1993) Am J Hosp Pharm 50, 2561.
45 Loucas SP et al. (1990) Am J Hosp Pharm 47, 1559.
46 Altavela JL et al. (1994) Am J Hosp Pharm 51, 490.
47 Shook TL et al. (1984) A n n Intern Med 101, 498.
48 Daly TJ et al. (1984) N Engl J Med 310, 1123.
49 Korn SH, Comer JB. (1985) A n n Intern Med 102, 274.
50 Newerly K, Berson SA. (1957) Proc SOCExp Biol Med 94, 751.
51 Hill JB. (1959) Proc SOCExp Biol Med 102, 75.
52 Petty C , Cunningham NL. (1974) Anesthesiology 40, 400.
53 Schildt B et al. (1978) Acta Anaesth Scand 22, 556.
54 Widere TE et al. (1983) Kidney Int 23, 22.
55 Alberti KGMM. (1989) Br Med Bull 45, 242.
56 Sanson TH, Levine SN. (1989) Drugs 38, 289.
57 Corallo C et al. (1995) Aust J Hosp Pharm 25, 129.
58 Tarr BD et al. (1991) Am J Hosp Pharm 48, 2631.
59 Kowaluk E A et al. (1983) Am J Hosp Pharm 40, 118.
60 Cossum PA, Roberts MS. (1981) Eur J Clin PharmacoZl9, 181.
61 Satou V et al. (1994) Int J Pharm 107, 111.
62 Evans RJ. (1961) Lancet ii, 1451.
63 Johnson CE, Vigoreaux JA. (1984) Am J Hosp Pharm 41, 306.
64 Bailey LC et al. (1991) Am J Hosp Pharm 48, 2627.
65 Darbar D et al. (1996) Am J Health System Pharmacy 53, 655.
66 Chiou WL, Moorhatch P. (1973) J A M A 223, 328.
67 Nedich RL. (1973) J A M A 224, 1531.
68 Ruz V et al. (1995) STP Pharma Pratiques 5 , 190.
69 Speaker TJ et al. (1991) J Parent Sci Techno1 45, 212.
70 Lyons RW et al. (1979) N Engl J Med 300, 372.
71 Sugar J. (1974) Arch Ophthalmol91, 520.
72 Grant E. (1988) Pharm J 241, 148.
73 Macsai MS et al. (1993) C L A O J 19, 166.
74 Wing DS, Gellatly KW. (1987) Can Pharm J 120, 90.
75 Bortnick KA. (1986) Pharmacy Times 52, 102.
76 Lostritto RT. (1986) Natl Assoc Retail Drugg J 108, 9.
77 Engle JP. (1990) Am Drugg 201, 54.
78 Engle JP. (1993) Am Pharmacy 33, 39.
79 Chapman JM et al. (1992) J Cataract Refractive Surgery 18, 456.
80 Heyrman TP et al. (1989) J Cataract Refractive Surgery 15, 169.
80 Hoechst Marion Roussel (1977) Romipril (ritace). Current promotional literature.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 14
Drug Interactions with Alcohol
INTRODUCTION
Patients taking medicines are commonly warned to avoid drinking alcohol but the
advice is often imprecise, misleading or even unnecessary (1, 2). In this section we
examine the interactions between medicines and alcohol and suggest ways of making
the advice more helpful.
Usually the advice given is simply ‘avoid alcoholic drink’ (BNF). What patients
need to know, however, is whether abstinence should be total, for how long any
abstinence should apply and what the risks might be. The principle concerns are
that drinking alcohol will reduce the efficacy of the medication or increase its
unwanted effects. Many of the interactions arise because drugs and alcohol can
interfere with each other’s metabolism. Other interactions occur if their CNS depressant effects summate (2).

METABOLISM OF ALCOHOL
Some 90-98% of ingested alcohol is oxidized to acetaldehyde in the liver mainly
by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase. The acetaldehyde is converted by aldehyde
dehydrogenase to acetyl-coenzyme A, which is then oxidized to C 0 2 and water, or
used in the synthesis of cholesterol and other tissue constituents. Alcohol may also
be metabolized to acetylaldehyde by the liver microsomal mixed-function oxidases.
The contribution of this pathway is usually small but it increases when the blood
alcohol concentration is high. Age, gender and genetic factors influence rates of
metabolism and affect the way individuals respond to alcohol (2).
Drugs that inhibit the oxidation of acetaldehyde can cause a systemic reaction if
taken with alcohol (e.g. disulfiram). Other drugs also inhibit aldehyde dehydrogenase and cause acetaldehyde to accumulate in the blood (e.g. metronidazole, cepham-

563

564

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

andole), whilst chlorpropamide increases acetaldehyde levels and causes a facial
flush in about one-third of patients if taken with alcohol. Flushing after alcohol
has also been reported in patients taking procarbazine (3), oral ketoconazole (4)
and, in one patient, griseofulvin (5). It is not known if these reactions are caused
by inhibition of acetaldehyde metabolism. Verapamil delays the elimination of
alcohol and prolongs alcohol intoxication ( 6 ) .

ACUTE OR CHRONIC ALCOHOL INTAKE
Alcohol may interfere with the effects of drugs metabolized by liver microsomal
enzymes. The type of interaction depends on whether the alcohol intake is acute
or chronic. Binge-drinking inhibits the metabolism of drugs by competing for microsoma1 enzymes. In contrast, regular consumption of large amounts of alcohol (more
than 25 units per day) (7, 8) induces liver microsomal enzymes and so can increase
the metabolism of co-consumed drugs. This may, however, be offset by alcoholinduced liver damage, Potentially important interactions can occur with drugs such
as phenytoin, warfarin and tolbutamide in chronic heavy drinkers; serum levels of
these drugs are reduced by one-third to one-half. Serum levels of drugs are unlikely
to be affected by moderate or occasional drinking (9, 10).
In chronic heavy drinkers, alcohol may induce the enzymes that convert paracetamol to its hepatotoxic metabolite (N-acetyl-benzoquinoneimine).At the same time
malnourishment may cause glutathione deficiency with impairment of the ‘moppingup’ process for the hepatotoxin (11).
The CNS effects of alcohol may add to the CNS depressant effects of drugs such as
sedatives, hypnotics, anxiolytics, opioid analgesics, antidepressants, antipsychotics,
anti-epileptics and HI-antihistamines. The effect of the interaction on wakefulness,
concentration and performance will depend on the dose of the drug and the pattern
of alcohol intake. Patients should be warned of this and that the effects of alcohol
may be exaggerated (2).
Alcohol, even in moderate amounts, may cause acute vasodilation, especially of
skin blood vessels. Patients taking hypotensive agents such as ACE inhibitors,
nitrates, P-blockers or a,-blockers may develop postural hypotension, with dizziness
and fainting shortly after taking a drink. Conversely, regular intake of more than
4 unitdday may raise blood presure and is a risk factor for stroke (12).

CONCLUSION
Alcohol interacts with many drugs, increasing or reducing the effect of some and
itself being affected by others. Abstaining from alcohol altogether is usually unnecessary and may result in the patient becoming non-compliant. There are only a
few instances in which women who drink up to 2-3 unitdday, and men up to 3-4
unitdday should abstain totally from drinking alcohol. For other drugs that interact,
patients need to be advised of the likely effects if they drink whilst taking medic-

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ALCOHOL

565

ation. For patients who are alcoholics, it may be necessary to adjust the dose of
medication (2).
The Table of Drug Interactions in this section gives specific detail of the sequelae
and management of interactions between alcohol and co-consumed medication.
Combination

Interaction

AlcohoYanalgesic
acetaminophen
(paracetamol)

Heavy drinkers have an increased risk of liver damage
after moderate overdoses of paracetamol (11). Severe
liver failure developed in three alcoholics after taking
therapeutic doses of paracetamol; one died in hepatic
coma (13).
Patients should be warned of this effect (14). See
introduction to this section for mechanism of induction
and cause of toxicity.

Aspirin

Two subjects showed expected and moderate
prolongation of bleeding time which peaked at 12 hr
and returned to normal by 24 hr after aspirin (325 mg)
ingestion. A second rise in bleeding time at 36 or 60 hr
was associated with alcohol intake 4 hr earlier (15).
Patients should be warned of this possibility;
gastrointestinal irritation to aspirin may be worsened
by alcohol intake. Advise no or low alcohol intake.

Dextropropoxyphene

There have been a disturbing number of deaths from
either accidental or intentional overdosage.
Overdosage is often complicated by patients also
taking alcohol and using mixed preparations such as
dextropropoxyphene with paracetamol or aspirin.
Death has occurred rapidly (within an hour) and the
quantity of dextropropoxyphene taken has often been
small (16-24).

AlcohoVanticoagulant

Acute alcohol intake, even in moderate amounts,
potentiates the action of coumarin anticoagulants
(e.g.warfarin) by competitive inhibition of their hepatic
enzyme metabolism. In alcoholics the half-life of
warfarin is reduced due to alcohol induction of liver
microsomal enzymes.
In chronic heavy drinkers the half-life of warfarin is
reduced (7), but patients with liver dysfunction who
are well controlled on warfarin may become over
anticoagulated after binge drinking (25).

566

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

AlcohoYanticoagulant
c0n.t.

The most critical factor is that the alcohol intake is
relatively constant from day to day. In one study a
daily intake of 7 units (3 at lunchtime and 4 with food
in the evening) or less had no effect on warfarin levels
or anticoagulant control (26). However, for practical
purposes it may be best to advise patients to avoid
alcohol.

AlcohoYanticonvulsant

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study in 29
patients with epilepsy, moderate social drinking had no
effect on seizure frequency, E E G activity or blood
concentrations of carbamazepine, ethosuximide or
phenytoin (24). Sodium valproate levels (which
commonly fluctuate in individual patients) rose slightly.
In chronic heavy drinkers (>30 unitdday), serum
levels of phenytoin are reduced by about one third
(10). Serum levels of phenytoin are not affected by
moderate or occasional drinking (29). Although there
is no published evidence, carbamazepine is likely to be
affected similarly (2).

AlcohoVantidepressant
MAOIs

Hypertensive reactions may occur due to the tyramine
content of some alcoholic drinks, notably beers and
both red and white wines (27, 28).
Recommend avoiding all alcoholic beverages including
low-alcohol or alcohol-free beers; these beers are also
rich in tyramine (27). There is no evidence of an
interaction between alcohol and moclobemide, the
reversible inhibitor of monoamine oxidase-A (29).

Tricyclic (polycyclic)
compounds

Enhanced sedation, inhibition of intestinal movement,
and fatty changes in the liver are consequences of this
interaction. Ability to drive or operate machinery may
be grossly impaired. Patients may show unusual and
unexpected behavioural disorders, especially during the
first few days of treatment (30-34).
Advise low to no alcohol intake.

Selective serotonin
re-uptake inhibitors

The effects of alcohol may be potentiated by these
agents (35).

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ALCOHOL

Combination

567

Interaction

(SSRIs)

SSRIs impair the ability to drive and operate
machinery and these may be further impaired by the
effects of alcohol.

AlcohoVantidiabetic
agent

Large intakes of alcohol may cause severe
hypoglycaemia (36-38). In general, diabetic patients
do not need to abstain from alcohol completely but
they should not exceed 3 unitslday (men) or 2
unitslday (women) (39). However, patients need to
take account of the calorific value of alcohol, including
any sugar-containing mixers, in the management of
their diet (2).

Biguanides (metformin)
sulphonylureas

In patients on metformin, binge-drinking increases the
risk of lactic acidosis (40-42). In alcoholics there is
induction of hepatic microsomal enzymes and a
reduced half-life of, for example, chlorpropamide and
tolbutamide ( 7 , 43).
In heavy drinkers (30 unitdday) blood levels of
tolbutamide are roughly halved ( 7 ) . Blood clearance of
tolbutamide is unlikely to be affected in those who
drink only a few times per week, or in ex-drinkers with
advanced, but well-compensated cirrhosis of the liver
(8) *
Chlorpropamide facial flush (CPAF) has been
suggested as a marker for a special type of non-insulindependent diabetes and may be akin to metencephalininduced flush. A central prostaglandin-dependent step
in CPAF is proposed and blockade by aspirin is
thought to be due to interference with prostaglandin
synthesis (38, 44-53).
Facial flushing occurred in two of 43 non-insulindependent diabetics treated with tolbutamide (54).

AlcohoVantihypertensives Alcohol, even in moderate amounts, may cause acute
ACE inhibitors
vasodilation, especially of the skin blood vessels.
P-blockers
Patients taking medication such as ACE inhibitors,
Ca+-channel blockers
nitrates, P-blockers or al-blockers may develop
diuretics
postural hypotension, with dizziness and fainting,
enzyme inhibitors
shortly after having a drink, particularly at the start of

568

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

e.g.
methyldopa
nitrates, etc.

treatment (2). Conversely, regular intake of more than
about 4 units/day probably raises blood pressure and is
a risk factor for stroke (12).

Alcoholhromocriptine

Reduced tolerance to bromocriptine (35). Alcoholenhanced nausea and symptoms of bromocriptine
toxicity were reported in two woman patients.
Abstinence from alcohol reduced their severity and
incidence and higher doses of bromocriptine could be
tolerated (55).
Alcohol intolerance was reported in five of 73 patients
receiving bromocriptine for the treatment of
acromegaly (56).

AlcohoYcephalosporin

A disulfiram-like reaction occurs with the parenteral
cephalosporin, cephamandole, but not with other
cephalosporins avaliable in the UK. Patients given
cephamandole should be advised to abstain from
alcohol while receiving the drug and for 72 hr (or a
week in patients with renal impairment) after stopping
it (2).

Alcohokhlormethiazole

Although chlormethiazole is a popular choice for the
treatment of alcohol withdrawal symptoms, if it is
given long-term, alcoholics readily transfer dependency
to it, often while continuing to abuse alcohol. The
outcome of such combined abuse is often severe selfpoisoning with deep coma and potentially fatal
respiratory depression (57). Five fatal cases of selfpoisoning have been reported in chronic alcoholics
being treated with chlormethiazole (58).

AlcohoVcimetidine

There is continuing dispute as to whether a significant
interaction occurs with cimetidine. Although
cimetidine inhibits alcohol dehydrogenase in the gastric
mucosa the significance of this site for alcohol
metabolism is uncertain (59). Studies have reported
both significant increases in blood alcohol (60, 61) and
a lack of such increases (62, 63). Current views appear
to be that any interaction is unlikely to be clinically
important (59, 64).

DRUG INTERACTIONSWITH ALCOHOL

Combination

569

Interaction

AlcohoYCNS
depressants

The CNS effects of alcohol may add to the CNS
depressant effects of drugs such as hypnotics,
anxiolytics, opioid analgesics, antidepressants,
antipsychotics, anti-epileptics, and HI-antihistamines.
It is difficult to predict if an interaction will occur that
affects wakefulness and performance. The extent of
the interaction will depend on the dose of the drug and
the pattern of alcohol intake. Patients should be
warned about any possible interaction due to alcohol
intake and how it could affect them (e.g. drowsiness,
poor concentration, reduced ability to perform certain
tasks. They should be advised that the effects of
alcohol may be exaggerated (2).

AlcohoYdisulfiram and
disulfiram-like agents
e.g. metronidazole
cephalosporin
cephamandole

Disulfiram inhibits the oxidation of acetaldehyde; this
reaction is the basis for the use of disulfiram in
encouraging alcohol abstinence. The reaction which
includes facial flushing, throbbing headache,
hypotension, palpitations, tachycardia and nausea and
vomiting starts 5-15 min after drinking alcohol and
lasts several hours. It is rarely dangerous but collapse,
cardiac arrhythmias and even death have occurred
(65). In susceptible patients this reaction may be
triggered by small amounts of alcohol in cough
linctuses, some mouthwashes and food. Flushing may
occur if alcohol-containing substances (e.g. aftershave
lotions) are applied to the skin (66).
Metronidazole, like disulfiram, inhibits aldehyde
dehydrogenase and causes acetaldehyde accumulation
in the body. The reaction is likely to be more severe
the higher the dose of metronidazole and the amount
of alcohol ingested. Interactions have occurred in
women using vaginal metronidazole but are uncommon
(67). Patients should not drink alcohol while taking
metronidazole and for 48 hr after stopping it. The data
sheet for tinidazole, a related drug, warns about the
possibility of a disulfiram-like interaction although
there are no published reports of such effects (2).
A disulfiram-like reaction also occurs with the
parenteral cephalosporin, cephamandole (68), but not
with other cephaloporins available in the UK. Patients
should abstain from alcohol while taking the antibiotic

570

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

AlcohoVdisulfiram and
disulfiram-like agents
cont.

and for 72 hr (or 1 week in cases of renal impairment)
after stopping it.

REFERENCES

1 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin. (1995) 33, 86.
2 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin. (1996) 34,36.
3 Todd IDH. (1965) Br Med J 1, 628.
4 Magnasco AJ, Magnasco LD. (1986) Clin Pharm 5, 522.
5 Simon HJ, Rantz LA. (1961) Ann Rev Med 12, 111.
6 Bauer LA et al. (1992) Clin Pharmacol Ther 52, 6.
7 Kater RMH et al. (1969) A m J Med Sci 258, 35.
8 Iber FL. (1977) Clin Pharmacol Ther 22, 735.
9 O’Reilly RA. (1978) Clin Res 26, 145A.
10 Hoppener RJ et al. (1983) Epilepsia 24, 459.
11 Zimmerman HJ, Maddrey WC. (1995) Hepatology 22, 767.
12 Royal Colleges of Physicians, Psychiatrists and General Practitioners. (1995) Royal Colleges, London.
13 McClain J et al. (1980) JAMA 244, 251.
14 Craig RM. (1980) JAMA 244, 272.
15 Deykin D et al. (1982) N Engl J Med 306, 852.
16 Carson DJL, Carson E. (1977) Lancet i, 894.
17 Young RJ. (1983) Drugs 26, 70.
18 Madsen PS et al. (1984) Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 28, 661.
19 Bowed D et al. (eds) (1984) Hum Toxiocol3 (Suppl), 1s.
20 Proudfoot AT. (1984) Hum Toxicol 3 (Suppl), 85s.
21 Whittington RM. (1984) Hum Toxicol 3 (Suppl), 175
22 Young RJ, Lawson AAH. (1980) Br Med J 280, 1045.
23 Henry JJ, Cassidy SL. (1986) Lancet i, 1414.
24 Segest E. (1987) Hum Toxicol 6, 203.
25 Udall JA. (1970) Clin Med 77, 20.
26 O’Reilly RA. (1978) Clin Res 26, 145A.
27 Hannah P et al. (1988) Lancet i, 879.
28 Murray J A et al. (1988) Lancet i, 1167.
29 Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin. (1994) 32, 6.
30 Zirkle GA et al. (1959) JAMA 171, 1496.
31 Landaeur AA et al. (1969) Science 163, 1467.
32 Milner G. (1969) Med JAust 2, 153.
33 Griffin JP, D’Arcy PF. (1974) Prescribersí J 14, 55.
34 Scott DB et al. (1982) Psychopharmacology 76, 209.
35 British National Formulary. (1996) No. 31. Appendix 1. British Medical Association and
The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London, p. 537.
36 Arky R A et al. (1968) JAMA 206, 575.
37 JAMA. (1968) Editorial 206, 639.
38 Fitzgerald MG et al. (1962) Diabetes 2, 40.
39 Connor H, Marks V. (1985) Hum Nutr Appl Nutr (1985) 39A, 393.
40 Johnson HK, Waterhouse C. (1968) Am J Med 45, 98.
41 Davidson MB et al. (1966) N Engl J Med 275, 886.
42 Schaffalitzky de Muckadell OB et al. (1979) Acta Med Scand 206, 269.

DRUG INTERACTIONS WITH ALCOHOL

43 Kater RMH et al. (1969) J A M A 207, 363.
44 Leslie RDG, Pyke DA. (1978) Br Med J 2, 1519.
45 Pyke DA, Leslie RDG. (1978) Br Med J 2, 1421.
46 Strakosch CR et al. (1980) Lancet i, 394.
47 Leslie RDG et al. (1979) Lancet i, 341.
48 Ohlin H et al. (1982) Br Med J 285, 838.
49 Kobberling J, Weber M. (1980) Lancet i, 538.
50 De Silva NE et al. (1981) Lancet i, 128.
51 Kobberling J et al. (1980) Diabetologia 19, 359.
52 Barnett AH, Pyke DA. (1981) Lancet i, 2232,
53 Jerntorp P et al. (1981) Diabetes 30, 788.
54 Capretti L et al. (1981) Br Med J 283, 1361.
55 Wass JAH et al. (1977) Br Med J 1, 875.
56 Ayres J , Maisey MN. (1980) N Engl J Med 302, 806.
57 McInnes GT. (1987) Br Med J 294, 592.
58 Horder JM. (1978) Br Med J 1, 693.
59 Levitt MD. (1993) Ann Intern Med 118, 564.
60 Holt S et al. (1991) Gut 32, A1220.
61 DiPadova C et al. (1992) J A M A 267, 83.
62 Fraser AG et al. (1992) J A M A 267, 2469
63 Raufman J-P et al. (1993) Ann Intern Med 118, 468.
64 Hansten PD. (1992) J A M A 267, 2469.
65 Kwentus J, Major LF. (1979) J Stud Alcohol 40, 428.
66 Stoll D, King LE Jr. (1980) J A M A 244, 2045.
67 Plosker GL. (1987) Clin Pharm 6, 189.
68 Portier H et al. (1980) Lancet ii, 263.

571

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 15
Nutrient-Drug Interactions
INTRODUCTION
Nutrient-drug interactions are not as often reported as drug-drug interactions but
their potential frequency is far greater since food is by far the most common
substance associated with the ingestion of oral doses of medicines (1-5).
Nutrients may affect the bioavailability and clinical efficacy of oral medication. On
occasion, the interactions may indeed evoke toxicity as with hypertensive episodes
following tyramine-monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) antidepressant interactions. Many medicines are linked with meals in dosing directions and interactions
between them deserve much more emphasis and attention.

ABSORPTION OF MEDICINES: PHYSIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS
Most oral drugs pass from the lumen of the gut across the epithelial lining into the
adjacent splanchnic capillary network of the blood circulation. This is a passive
process and food may interfere with drug absorption or elimination by altering
splanchnic blood flow. The bulk-volume of the food can also have a pronounced
effect. Other mechanisms of interaction include changes in gut motility, better drug
absorption in the presence of a fatty meal, better drug dissolution and dispersion,
decreased protein binding, acute changes in hepatic enzyme activity, and changes
in gastric acidity. Such mechanisms have been recently reviewed by Welling (6).
Reduced or delayed absorption may be due to delayed gastric emptying or dilution
of the drug in the gut contents (7). Gastric emptying times may be delayed by hot
meals (8), high fat content (9) and high viscosity solutions (10). In general, fatty
meals delay gastric emptying times to a greater extent than either protein-rich or
carbohydrate-rich meals (9). Delayed absorption of drugs brought about by food

573

574

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

does not always imply that a lesser amount of drug is absorbed, but rather that the
time for a drug to reach peak levels after a single dose in lengthened ((11).
Vitamin and mineral supplements are a common combination and are readily
obtained as non-prescription medicines. The possibility of their interaction with
prescribed medicines may not be appreciated. It is the mineral component of the
combination product, as well as the mineral content of antacids and some laxatives
that is responsible for the majority of these interactions. It should not be forgotten
that many foods are rich in minerals and these may also enter into interactions (e.g.
with tetracyclines and dairy products), in addition branded breakfast cereals have
added minerals and vitamins. A list showing the mineral content of common foodstuffs is given at the end of this chapter (Table 6), and in this respect it must be
remembered that the portion of food normally consumed should be taken into
account as well as its mineral content.
The following Tables of Drug Interactions are divided into two main parts; firstly,
those nutrient-drug interactions causing reduced/delayed absorption or reduced
bioavailabilty , and secondly those interactions causing increased absorption or bioavailability. These are based on a recent review by D'Arcy (12).
PART1: REDUCEDORDELAYEDABSORPTIONANDREDUCED
BIOAVAILABILITY
For convenience, drugs other than antimicrobial agents are listed in Table 1 and
antimicrobial agents in Table 2.
Drug names printed in bold face in the table are those which enter into wellTable 1, DRUGS (OTHER THAN ANTIMICROBIALAGENTS) WHOSE ABSORPTION FROM THE GUT MAY BE REDUCED
(R) OR DELAYED (D), OR WHOSE THERAPEUTIC EFFECTS MAY BE ANTAGONIZED (A), OR WHOSE BIOAVAILABILIT"
MAY BE REDUCED (RB) BY THE PRESENCE OF FOOD OR METAL IONS (SPECIFIED)
acetaminophen (D) (13)
alendroate sodium (R) (14-16)
ambenonium chloride (R) (17)
aminohexane diphosphonate (AHDP, neridronic acid) (R) (18)
atenolol (R) (A1 ions) (19)
bisphosphonates (R) (14-16, 20-26)
captopril (R) (27, 28)
carbidopa (R) (29)
chloroquine (R) (30, 31)
digoxin (D) (32-34)
etidronate (R) (20-23)
flecainide (R) (milk) (35)
levodopa (R) (iron salts) (29, 36) (food, amino acids) (37-40)
P-methyldigoxin (D) (32)
methyldopa (R) (41)
nitrendipine (R) (42-44)
pamidronate disodium (R) (22)
penicillamine (R) (food, iron, antacids) (45, 46) (RB) (47)
phenytoin (R) (antacids) (48, 49)
pyrimethamine (R) (30)
tiludronate (R) (30)
warfarin (A) (50-55)

NUTRIENT-DRUG INTERACTIONS

575

Table 2. ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS WHOSE ABSORPTION FROM THE GUT MAY BE REDUCED (R) OR DELAYED (D),
OR WHOSE BIOAVAILABILIW MAY BE REDUCED (RB) BY THE PRESENCE OF FOOD OR METAL IONS (SPECIFIED)
amoxycillin (D, R) (56)
ampicillin (R) (56)
azithromycin (R) (57, 58)
benzylpenicillin G (R) (metal cations) (59)
cefaclor (D) (60)
cefixime (D) (60)
cefprozil (R) (61)
cephalexin (D) (60)
cephalosporins (D) (60-62)
cephradine (D) (60, 63)
cetibuten (R) (62)
chlortetracycline (R) (64)
ciprofloxacin (R, RB) (dairy products) (65) (antacids, Al, Ca, Fe, Mg salts) (66-72)
cloxacillin (R) (73)
demeclocycline (R) (food, milk, metal cations) (64, 74-77)
didanosine (RB) (78, 79)
doxycycline (R) (food, milk, metal cations) (64, 74-77)
erythromycin base or stearate (R) (depends on formulation) (59)
isoniazid (R, RB) (80)
lincomycin (R, D) (81)
methacycline HCl (R) (food, milk, metal cations) (64)
minocycline (R) (metal cations) (72, 82).
nafcillin sodium (R, D) (83).
norfloxacin (D) (84) (Fe, milk, yoghurt) (85, 86)
ofloxacin (D) (59)
oleandomycin (D) (59)
oxytetracycline HCI (R) (food, milk, metal cations) (64)
quinolones (D) (84, 87-94)
penicillins (most) (R) (post-prandial) (95-97)
rifampicin (RB) (98)
roxithromycin (R) (when taken after but not before meals) (99)
rufloxacin (R) (Al-Mg antacids) (100)
sodium fusidate (D) (101)
sulphonamides (D) (11, 102)
tetracycline HCl (R) (milk, dairy products, metal cations) (64, 82, 103)
tetracyclines (R) (59, 74-77)
zidovudine (D) (104, 105) (R)(106, 107)

documented, clinically important interactions. The remaining drug entries are those
whose interactions are likely to be clinically important although they lack good
documentation. Interactions which are likely to be clinically irrelevant have been
excluded from the list.
This table includes bisphosphonates used in the treatment of osteoporosis;
Articles in the literature contain specific warnings about their interaction with
vitamins or foods with a mineral supplement or content (1, 3, 14-16, 20-26).
Material with a high calcium content, such as milk, may reduce the absorption of
bisphosphonates. Vitamins with mineral supplements, calcium supplements, laxatives containing magnesium, or antacids containing calcium or aluminium, should
not be taken within 2 hr of dosing with a bisphosphonate. The elderly osteoporotic
woman may need special counselling to understand when to take calcium or iron

576

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

supplements, which are often recommended for the elderly. Such restrictions may
be confusing to her unless they are explained.
Two AIDS medicines have been listed in Table 2 and further detail is necessary
in view of the importance of these treatments. Nutritional problems have been a
part of the clinical aspects of AIDS from its earliest recognition. Wasting and
diarrhoea will occur sooner or later and most patients with clinically advanced AIDS
and opportunistic infections are anorexic and suffer from micronutrient deficiencies
(108). AIDS patients tend to increase their intake of nutrients for which some data
support a role in improving health, resistance to infections and, in some instances,
inhibition of HIV replication in vitro (109-113). AIDS sufferers often consume
many times the recommended daily allowance for minerals and vitamins (114).
With current knowledge, only two drugs used in AIDS and HIV infection seem
to be affected by diet. First, oral absorption of zidovudine is reduced when the
drug is taken with a high-fat content meal compared with fasting for at least 6 hr
(104,105). Other studies have reported significantly delayed and reduced absorption
when the drug is taken with food (106, 107), although not with a protein-based
meal. Thus, to achieve a high peak plasma concentration zidovudine should be
taken on an empty stomach. The second drug, didanosine, which has activity against
retroviruses, including HIV, is acid-labile and when given by mouth it should be
taken under fasting conditions as food reduces its bioavailabiiity (78, 79).

PART 2: INCREASED DRUG ABSORPTION OR BIOAVAILABILITY
A variety of drugs (Table 3) and antimicrobials (Table 4) are better absorbed or
have improved bioavailability if taken with food. Increased absorption has been
attributed to a number of mechanisms including delayed stomach emptying which
permits greater dissolution of the drug, improved dispersion, reduced protein binding and increased splanchnic blood flow (115).
Drug names printed in bold in these tables are those with well-documented
evidence of clinically important nutrient-drug interactions. The remaining interactions are also clinically important, but there is less firm evidence of this.
There are a number of drugs mentioned in this table that enter into an interaction
with grapefruit juice and potentiate their effects, This potentiation is thought to
depend on the inhibitory effect of the flavonoids (e.g. naringin, quercetin) exclusive
to grapefruit juice on the hepatic cytochrome P450 isoenzymes (CYPlA2, CYP3A4)
which are responsible for the metabolism of these drugs (see review (118)).

COMMENT
Special comment is necessary on two categories of drugs, firstly, the MA01 antidepressants and, secondly, on the variety of sustained-release formulations that are
now available for a number of drugs.

NUTRIENT-DRUG INTERACTIONS

577

Table 3. DRUGS (OTHER THAN ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS) WHOSE ABSORPTION FROM THE GUT MAY BE ENHANCED (E) OR WHOSE BIOAVAILABILITYMAY BE ENHANCED (BE) BY THE PRESENCE OF FOOD OR METAL IONS
(SPECIFIED)
aminopyrine (E) (107)
cyclosporin (BE) (grapefruit juice) (116-118)
danazol (BE) (119)
felodipine (BE) (grapefruit juice) (120)
fenretinide (BE) (121)
hydralazine (BE) (122, 123)
ibuprofen (E) (Mg ions) (124)
labetalol (BE) (125)
methoxsalen (E) (7)
metoprolol (BE) (food, AIOH3) (126, 127)
midazolam (BE) (128)
nifedipine (BE) (grapefruit juice) (42, 120)
nisoldipine (BE) (grapefruit juice) (129)
nitrendipine (BE) (grapefruit juice) (43)
propranolol (BE) (126)
pseudoephedrine (E) (130)
spironolactone (E) (131)
terfenadine (E) (132, 133)
ticlopidine (E) (134)
tramadol (E) (135)
vanoxerine (BE) (high-fat meal) (136)
vinpocetine (BE) (137)
zalosplrone (E) (138)

Table 4. ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS WHOSE ABSORPTION FROM THE GUT MAY BE ENHANCED (E) BY FOOD
AND/OR MINERAL SALTS
cefuroxime axetil (E) (139-144)
clofazimine (E) (145)
griseofulvin (E) (146-148)
itraconazole (E) (149, 150)
ketoconazole (E) (conflicting evidence) (151)
nitrofurantion (E) (152-154)

MA01 ANTIDEPRESSANTS
The use of monoamine oxidase inhibitor antidepressants (MAOIs) has diminished
over the years in favour of more recently introduced agents (e.g. tricyclics, tetracyclics and related compounds, and selective-serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs)) .
However, cases of hypertensive episodes from interaction with tyramine or other
pressor amine-containing foods and beverages still occur spasmodically (155, 156)
and patients taking these drugs must be warned to avoid such foods and beverages.
Furthermore, if their medication is changed from MAOIs they must allow a 14-day
drug-free period before use of food or drugs known to cause reactions. A reversible
selective MAO-A inhibitor, meclobemide, is suggested to have fewer systemic side
effects and a reduced risk of dietary and drug interaction than irreversible MAOIs
(157). Table 5 lists some foods and beverages reported to be rich in tyramine
content.

578

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Table 5 . SOME FOODS AND BEVERAGES REPORTED TO BE RICH IN TYRAMINE CONTENT*

avocardo pears
broad bean pods
beers, including low-alcohol beers
Bovril
canned figs
caviar
cheese (unprocessed, especially Cheddar and Gruykre)
Chianti wine, all other wines (red or white)
chocolate
game and game products
liver (especially chicken liver)
Martini
New Zealand prickly spinach (Tetragoniu tetragonoides)
pickled herring
yeast products (including Marmite)
yoghurt
‘Source: Basu (7), Griffin et al. (158).

SUSTAINED-RELEASE FORMULATIONS
Sustained- or controlled-release formulations may influence nutrient-drug interactions. Evidence from the literature is diffuse but there are reports which indicate
that there could be a problem. For example, absorption of the @blocker metoprolol
has been shown to be significantly increased by food (126, 127). However, the drug
in its controlled-release formulation of metoprolol succinate is affected far less by
food than the conventional release formulation (159).
Divergent results have also been reported with different formulations of verapamil. There was a 30% reduced absorption and a 45% reduced peak serum level
when the drug was taken as a sustained-release tablet with food (160). However,
in other studies using a capsulated sustained-release formulation, plasma profiles
were superimposable in the fed and fasting states (161, 162). In a further study,
the drug was administered as extended-release pellets in the fasting state and with
food; plasma verapamil profiles were the same for both treatments (163). An
extensive review on drug-food interactions has been produced by Welling (6) which
inter alia has covered food interactions with controlled-release preparations.

MINERAL CONTENT OF FOODS
Table 6 lists the mineral ion content (Ca, Cu, K, Mg, Na, Zn) of common foods.
The table is a guide to assist practitioners in advising patients to avoid specific
mineral-rich foods or alternatively to space the interval between consuming such
foods and drug intake. The list also serves to dispel some myths about the mineral
content of some foods, for example spinach, does not rank among the ten foods
with highest Fe content, and liquid cow’s milk is not among the ten foods with the
highest Ca content.

NUTRIENT-DRUG INTERACTIONS

579

Table 6. MINERAL CONTENT OF COMMON FOODS. THE TOP TEN FOODS WITH THE HIGHEST MINERAL CONTENT
IN EACH CLASS ARE LISTED. ALUMINIUM IS NOT INCLUDED SINCE THE FOOD CONTENT LARGELY DEPENDS ON
PACKAGING OR COOKING UTENSILS*
Foods high in mineral content (mg/100 g)
Copper
goose liver (4.9)
calf liver (4.4)
cocoa, dried powder (3.9)
oysters (3.7)
mussels (3.2)
lobster (2.2)
beef liver (2.1)
molasses (1.9)
mushrooms (1.8)
cheese (Edam) (1.7)

Magnesium
cocoa, dried powder (420)
wheat germ (336)
soybean flour (medium fat) (290)
almonds (dried) (270)
pine nuts (268)
cashew nuts (267)
Brazil nuts (225)
chick peas (160)
broad beans (159)
pistachio nuts (158)

Calcium
buttermilk, dried, non-fat (1300)
cheese (Emmental) (1180)
cheese (Parmesan) (1140)
cheese (Edam) (765)
cheese (Cheddar) (750)
cheese (Roquefort) (700)
scones (620)
cheese (processed) (547)
sardines, drained, solids (437)
Ovaltine, dried powder (360)

Sodium
beef, dried, salted (4300)
ham, smoked, raw (2530)
olives, green in brine (2400)
caviar (2200)
salmon, smoked (1880)
salami sausage (1850)
bacon (1770)
pretzels (1680)
cheese (Roquefort) (1420)
Bologna sausage (1300)

Iron
Ovaltine, dried powder (23)
pork liver (19)
cocoa, dried powder (12.5)
caviar (11.8)
lamb’s liver (10.9)
wheat germ (9.4)
soybean flour, medium fat (9.1)
egg yolk, whole dried (8.7)
lentils (8.6)
chicken liver (7.9)

Potassium
cocoa, dried powder (900-3200)
soybean, flour full-fat (2030)
buttermilk, dried, non-fat (1745)
molasses (1500)
onions, dried (1380)
kidney beans (1310)
broad beans (1210)
Ovaltine, dried powder (1200)
potato chips (1190)
peaches, dried (1100)

Zinc
oysters (6-100)
oatflakes (14)
pine nuts (14)
wheat germ (13)
beef liver (7.8)
corn flakes (7.7)
beef, canned, corned (5.6)
wheat flour, whole (5,5)
egg, whole, dried (5.0)
cheese (Emmental) (4.6)
*Source: Geigy Scientific Tables (164) from which more detailed information is available.

580

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

REFERENCES

1 Simon C, Schlienger JL. (1984) J Med Strasbourg 15, 191.
2 Bloss BS. (1992) ASHP Midyear Clinical Meeting 27, 1.
3 Murray JJ, Healy MD. (1991) J Am Diet Assoc 91, 66.
4 Trovato A et al. (1991) Am Family Physician 44, 1651.
5 Stein-Gocken JM, Carasiti ME. (1993) ASHP Midyear Clinical Meeting 28, 456.
6 Welling PG. (1996) In: D’Arcy PF, MoElnay JC, Welling PG. (eds) Mechanisms of
drug interactions, Springer, Berlin, p. 45.
7 Basu TV. (1988) Drug-nutrient interactions. Croom Helm London.
8 Davenport HW. (1977) Physiology of the digestive tract, 4th edn, Yearbook Med
Publishers, Chicago, p. 194.
9 Bachrach WH. (1959) The physiology and pathologic physiology of the stomach. Ciba
Clin Symp 11, 3.
10 Levy G, Jusko W. (1965) J Pharm Sci 54, 219.
11 Macdonald H et al. (1967) Chemotherapia 12, 282.
12 D’Arcy PF. (1995) Adverse Drug React Toxic01Rev 14, 233.
13 Jaffe JM et al. (1971) J Pharm Sci 60, 1646.
14 Lin JH et al. (1991) Drug Metab Dispos 19, 926.
15 Lin JH. (1991) Pharmacologist 33, 209.
16 Lin J H et al. (1991) Pharm Res 8 (Suppl), S273.
17 Ohtsubo K et al. J Clin Pharmacol 42, 371.
18 Delmas PD et al. (1987) A m J Med 83, 276.
19 Lundborg P, Regardh C-G. (1979) Communication, International Conference on Drug
Absorption, Edinburgh, September 1979, Abstract, 105.
20 Fogelman I et al. (1984) Calcif Tissue Znt 44 (Suppl 2), S74.
21 Fogelman I et al. (1986) Clin Endocrinol24, 57.
22 ThiCbaud D et al. (1986) Bone 7 , 247.
23 Fels JP et al. (1989) Calcif Tissue Znt 44 (Suppl), S104.
24 Storm T et al. (1990) N EngZ J Med 322, 1265.
25 Necciari J et al. (1992) 5th World Conference of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
July 1992, Yokohama, Japan (abstract), p. 305.
26 Fleisch H. (1987) Clin Orthop Relat Dis 217, 72.
27 Singhvi SM et al. (1982) J Clin Pharmacol22, 135.
28 Mantyla R et al. (1984) Znt J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol22, 626.
29 Campbell NRC. (1990) Br J Clin Pharmacol30, 599.
30 McElnay JC et al. (1982) J Trop Med Hyg 85, 153.
31 McElnay JC et al. (1982) J Trop Med Hyg 85, 159.
32 Tsutsumi K et al. (1992) J Clin Pharmacol32, 157.
33 Brown DD, Juhl RP. (1976) N Engl J Med 295, 1034.
34 McElnay JC et al. (1979) Experientia 35, 94.
35 Russell GAP, Martin RP. (1989) Arch Dis Child 64,860.
36 Campbell NRC, Hasinoff BB. (1991) Br J Clin Pharmacol31, 251.
37 Daniel PM et al. (1976) Lancet i, 95.
38 Nutt JG et al. (1984) N Engl J Med 310, 483.
39 Pearce LA, Waterbury LD. (1974) Neurology 24, 640.
40 Weitbrecht W-U, Weigel K. (1976) Dtsch Med Wochensch 101, 20.
41 Campbell NRC et al. (1988) Clin Pharmacol Ther 43, 381.
42 Bailey D G et al. (1991) Lancet i, 268
43 Soons PA et al. (1991) Clin Pharmacol Ther 50, 394.
44 Wells TG, Sinaiko AR. (1991) J Pediatr 118, 638.
45 Bergstrom RF et al. (1981) Clin Pharmacol Ther 30, 404.
46 Osman MA et al. (1983) Clin Pharmacol Ther 33, 465.

NUTRIENT-DRUG INTERACTIONS

581

47 Schuna A et al. (1983) Rheumatology 10, 95.
48 Kulshrestha VK et al. (1978) Br J Clin Pharmucol6, 177.
49 McElnay JC. (1980) Br J Pharmacol70, 126P.
50 Udall JA, Krock LB. (1968) Curr Ther Res 10, 207.
51 Qureshi GD et al. (1981) Arch Intern Med 141, 507.
52 Stockley I. (1984) Pharmacy l n t l 5 , 165.
53 Hogan RP. (1983) J A M A 249, 2679.
54 Walker FB. (1984) Arch Intern Med 144, 2089.
55 Kempin SJ. (1983) N Engl J Med 308, 1229.
56 Welling PG et al. (1977) J Pharm Sci 66, 549.
57 Fiese EF, Steften SH. (1990) J Antimicrob Chemother 25 (Suppl A), 39.
58 Drew RH, Gallis HA. (1992) Pharmacotherapy 12, 161.
59 Bartelink A. (1975) In: Cluff LE, Petrie JC. (eds) Clinical effects of interaction between
drugs, Excerpta Medica, Amsterdam, p. 103.
60 Wise R. (1990) J Antimicrob Chemother 26 (Suppl E), 13.
61 Tezlaff TR et al. (1978) J Pediatr 92, 292.
62 Harvengt C et al. (1973) J Clin Pharmacol 13, 36.
63 Schwinghammer TL et al. (1990) J Clin Pharmacol30, 893.
64 Neuvonen PJ et al. (1970) Br Med J 4 , 532.
65 Neuvonen PJ et al. (1991) Clin Pharmacol Ther 50, 498.
66 Polk RE et al. (1989) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 33, 1841.
67 Frost RW et al. (1989) Clin Pharmacol Ther 45, 165.
68 Lomaestro BM, Bailie GR. (1991) DZCP Ann Pharmacother 25, 1249.
69 Kara M et al. (1991) Br J Clin Pharmacol31, 257.
70 Brouwers JR et al. (1990) DZCP A n n Pharmacother 25, 1249.
71 Frost RW et al. (1992) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 36, 830.
72 Sahai J et al. (1993) Br J Clin Pharmacol35, 302.
73 Garrod LP, O’Grady L. (1971) Antibiotics and Chemotherapy, Livingstone, London, p.
77*
74 Kunin CM, Finland M. (1961) Clin Pharmacol Ther 2, 51.
75 Braybrooks MP et al. (1975) J Pharm Pharmacol27, 508.
76 Chin TF, Lach JL. (1975) Am J Hosp Pharm 32, 625.
77 Neuvonen PJ. (1976) Drugs 11, 45.
78 Shyu WC et al. (1991) Clin Pharmacol Ther 50, 509.
79 Knupp CA et al. (1993) J Clin Pharmacol33, 568.
80 Melander A et al. (1976) Acta Med Scund 200, 93.
81 McCall CE et al. (1967) Am J Med Sci 254, 144.
82 Leyden JJ. (1985) J Am Acad Dermatol 12, 308.
83 Reynolds JEF. (ed) (1996) Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, vol31, Pharmaceutical
Press, London, p. 252.
84 Issopoulos PB. (1989) Analyst 114, 627.
85 Kivisto KT et al. (1992) Antimicvob Agents Chemother 36, 489.
86 Lehto P et al. (1994) Br J Clin Pharmacol37, 82.
87 Kara M et al. (1991) J Clin Pharmacol31, 257.
88 Nakano M et al. (1978) Chem Pharm Bull 26, 1505.
89 Davies BI, Maesen FPV. (1989) Rev Znfect Dis 2 , S1083.
90 Frost RW et al. (1989) Clin Pharmacol Ther 45, 165.
91 Nix DE el al. (1989) Pharmacotherupy 9 , 377.
92 Polk RE. (1989) Am J Med 87, 76s.
93 Poly RE. (1989) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 33, 1841.
94 Sulkowska J, Staroscik R. (1978) Chem Anal 101.
95 McCarthy CG, Finland M. (1960) N Engl J Med 263, 315.
96 Welling PG. (1977) J Pharmacokinet Biopharm 5 , 291.

582

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

97 McCracken GH Jr et al. (1978) Pediatr 62, 738.
98 Khalil SAH et al. (1984) Int J Pharm 20, 99.
99 Puri SK, Lassman HB. (1987) J Antibiot Chemother 20 (Suppl B), 89.
100 Lazzaroni M et al. (1993) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 37, 2212.
101 Reeves DS. (1987) J Antimicrob Chemother 20, 467.
102 Jaffe JM et al. (1971) J Pharm Sci 60, 1646.
103 Welling PG et al. (1977) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 11, 462.
104 Unadkat JD et al. (1990) AIDS 4 , 229.
105 Lotterer E et al. (1991) Eur J Clin Pharmacol40, 305.
106 Ruhnke M et al. (1993) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 34, 2153.
107 Ueda Y et al. (1993) Chemotherapy (Tokyo)41, 499.
108 Keusch GT, Thea DM. (1993) Med CIin North Am 77, 795.
109 Cathcart RF 111. (1984) Med Hypotheses 14, 423.
110 Blakeslee JR et al. (1985) Cancer Res 45, 3471.
111 Badgley L. (1987) Healing AIDS naturally: Natural therapies for the immune system,
Human Energy Press, San Bruno, CA.
112 Lovejoy NC et al. (1988) J AIDS 1, 155.
113 Sergio W. (1988) Med Hypotheses 26, 251.
114 Beach RS et al. (1988) FASEB J 2, A1435.
115 Mao CC, Jacobson ED. (1970) Am J Clin Nutr 23, 280.
116 Ducharme MP et al. (1993) Br J Clin Pharmacol36, 457.
117 Proppe G et al. (1995) Br J Clin Pharmacol39, 337.
118 Bailey DG et al. (1994) Clin Pharmacokinet 26, 91
119 Charman WN et al. (1993) J Clin Pharmacol33, 381.
120 Bailey DG et al. (1987) Lancet 337, 268.
121 Doose DR et al. (1992) J Clin Pharmacol32, 1089.
122 Melander A et al. (1971) CIin Pharmacol Ther 22, 104.
123 Talseth T. (1977) Clin Pharmacokinet 2, 317.
124 Neuvonen PJ. (1991) J Clin Pharmacol31, 263.
125 Mantyla R et al. (1980) Br J Clin Pharmacol9, 435.
126 Melander A et al. (1977) Clin Pharmacol Ther 22, 108.
127 Plosker GL, Clissold SP. (1992) Drugs 43, 382.
128 Kupferschmidt HHI et al. (1995) Clin Pharmacol Ther 58, 20.
129 Bailey DG et al. (1993) Clin Pharmacol Ther 54, 589.
130 Lucarotti RL et al. (1972) J Pharm Sci 61, 903.
131 Melander A et al. (1971) Clin Pharmacol Ther 22, 100.
132 Benton R et al. (1994) Clin Pharmacol Ther 55, 146.
133 Honig PK et al. (1996) J Clin Pharmacol36, 345.
134 Shah J et al. (1990) J Clin Pharmacol30, 733.
135 Liao S et al. (1992) Pharm Res 9 (Suppl), S308.
136 Ingwersen SH et al. (1993) Br J Clin Pharmacol35, 308.
137 Lohmann A et al. (1992) Arzneim Forsch 42, 914.
138 Klamerus KJ et al. (1993) Clin Pharmacol Ther 53, 193.
139 Williams PEO, Harding SM. (1984) J Antimicrob Chemother 13, 191.
140 Harding SM et al. (1984) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 25, 78.
141 Sommers DK et al. (1984) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 25, 344.
142 Ginsberg CM et al. (1985) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 28, 504.
143 Fin AA et al. (1987) Biopharm Drug Dispos 8 , 519.
144 Ridgeway E et al. (1991) J Antimicrob Chemother 27, 663.
145 Holdiness MR. (1989) Clin Pharmacokinet 16, 74.
146 Crounse RG. (1961) J Invest Dermatol37, 529.
147 Epstein WL et al. (1972) Arch Dermatol 106, 344.
148 Ginsberg CM et al. (1983) J Pediatr 102, 309.

NUTRIENT-DRUG INTERACTIONS

583

149 Van Peer A et al. (1989) Eur J Clin Pharmacol36, 423.
150 Barone JA et al. (1993) Antimicrob Agents Chemother 37, 778.
151 Daneshmend TK, Warnock DW. (1988) Clin Pharmacokinet 144, 13.
152 Bates TR et al. (1974) Clin Pharmacol Ther 16, 63.
153 D’Arcy PF. (1985) Drug Zntell Clin Pharm 19, 540.
154 Rosenberg HA, Bates TR. (1976) Clin Pharmacol Ther 20, 227.
155 Murray JA et al. (1958) Lancet i, 1167.
156 Griffin MJJ, Morris JS. (1987) Drug Zntell Clin Pharm 21, 19.
157 Burkard WP et al. (1989) J Pharmacol Exp Ther 248, 391.
158 Griffin JP et al. (1988) In: Griffin JP, D’Arcy PF, Speirs CJ. (eds) A manual of adverse
drug interactions, 4th ed, London, Wright (Butterworth), p. 186.
159 Sandberg A et al. (1988) Eur J Clin Pharmacol33 (Suppl) S3.
160 Hoon TJ et al. (1992) A m J Cardiol70, 1072.
161 Devane JG, Kelly JG. (1991) A d v Ther 8 , 48.
162 Devane JG, Kelly JG. (1990) Drug Dev Znd Pharm 16, 1233.
163 Kozloski GD et al. (1992) Clin Pharm 11, 539.
164 Lentner C. (ed) (1981) Geigy Scient$c Tables, 8th edn, Ciba-Geigy, Basle, Switzerrland,
p. 243.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CHAPTER 16
Recent and Unconfirmed Drug Interactions
These interactions were published in the medical or pharmaceutical literature whilst
the bulk of this book was being printed and assembled. A note for guidance on the
investigation of drug interactions was published by The European Agency for the
Evaluation of Medicinal Products, Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products
(CPMP) in March 1997, and permission has kindly been given by Mr Fernand
Sauer, Director European Medicines Evaluation Agency (EMEA) for this text to
be reprinted in this volume as Annex 1.
Combination

AspirinlGinkgo biloba
(1)

Interaction

The dietary supplement Ginkgo biloba may interact
with aspirin causing bleeding problems. Bleeding from
the iris into the anterior chamber of the eye
(hyphema) has been reported in a 70-year-old patient.
The patient reported recurring, 15 min episodes of
blurred vision involving red discolouration. One week
earlier he had started taking a supplement containing
40 mg concentrated extract of Ginkgo biloba twice
daily. His only other medicine was aspirin 325 mg daily
which had been taken for 3 years following cardiac
bypass surgery. The patient stopped the supplement
and no further problems occurred over a 3 month
follow-up. One of the components of Ginkgo biloba
extract is ginkgolide B, a powerful inhibitor of platelet
activating factor. There are previous reports of
subdural haematoma and increased bleeding time with

585

586

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

AspirinlGinkgo biloba
cont.

long-term use of the extract (2, 3), which is marketed
as a supplement to improve mental alertness and to
treat peripheral vascular disease. This report suggests
that there may also be short-term effects.

Bromfenadphen ytoin
(4)

An open-label, non-randomized, multiple-dose,
inpatient study was conducted in 12 healthy male
volunteers to compare the the pharmacokinetics of the
non-narcotic analgesic bromfenac and the
anticonvulsant phenytoin when the drugs were given
individually and concomitantly. Volunteers received
multiple oral doses of bromfenac for 4 days and then
oral phenytoin for up to 14 days, followed by
concomitant administration of the two drugs for 8
days. Concomitant administration of the two drugs
caused an approximate 40% decrease in the mean
peak plasma concentration (C,,,) and the interdose
area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) of
bromfenac. The oral clearance (Cl,,) of bromfenac
doubled and the volume of distribution increased by
77%. For phenytoin, the mean peak serum
concentration and the AUC increased by 9 and 11%,
respectively, in the presence of bromfenac. The only
change in unbound phenytoin was a 16% increase in
the AUC. Although statistically significant, the
changes in the pharmacokinetic parameters of
phenytoin and unbound phenytoin were small.
Adjustments in the dose of phenytoin were thought
not to be required during concomitant administration
of bromfenac, although each patient’s clinical status
should be evaluated individually.

Cyclosporin/fluconazole
griseofulvin
ketoconazole
terbinafine

Cyclosporin is metabolized in the liver by the
microsomal cytochrome P450IIIA subfamily ( 5 ) .
Coadministration of drugs that interact with this
enzyme system may either induce or inhibit the
metabolism of cyclosporin thus causing subtherapeutic
or toxic cyclosporin levels. Fungal infection of the skin
is very common in transplant patients, but the existing
antifungal drugs (fluconazole griseofulvin,
ketoconazole) are all reported to affect cyclosporin
metabolism in transplant patients (6-8). Terbinafine, a

RECENT AND UNCONFIRMED DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

587

Interaction

new synthetic fungicidal agent, is effective in treating
fungal infections of the skin and nails (9). It does not
inhibit the cytochrome P450 system in vitro (10) and
the interaction with cyclosporin was minimal in normal
volunteers (11). Terbinafine (250 mg/day) was
administered to four renal transplant patients receiving
cyclosporin; trough cyclosporin levels were lowered. In
three patients this drop was small and no change was
required in the cyclosporin dosage level. In the fourth
case, cyclosporin dosage was increased (stepwise from
3.6 to 6.5 mg/kg/day) in view of subtherapeutic levels
of cyclosporin. Nevertheless, the overall magnitude of
the change in cyclosporin level was less than that
reported for for the interaction between cyclosporin,
griseofulvin, ketoconazole or fluconazole (7-9)
Terbinafine given for 4 to 24 weeks was effective in
clearing up the dermatophyte infection in all four cases
and renal function remained stable during this therapy.
It was emphasized that it was still ncessary to monitor
the cyclosporin level in patients whose drug levels were
at the lower end of the therapeutic target.

Cyclosporid
H,-antagonist
cimetidine, ranitidine

The literature does not support a pharmacodynamic
interaction between H2-antagonists and cyclosporin
that would result in potentiation of cyclosporin’s
nephrotoxicity. The increase in serum creatinine
associated with cimetidine, in the majority of cases, is
due to competition with creatinine for tubular
secretion. Both cimetidine and creatinine are organic
bases secreted in the proximal tubule. Ranitidine is
unlikely to produce a change in serum creatinine.
Additionally, there is no support for a pharmacokinetic
interaction. However, cimetidine may influence peak
concentrations of cyclosporin. Apart from the clinical
evidence cited in this review article (12) two abstracts
concur with these findings (13, 14). There is no
information from the literature or from the
manufacturers regarding interactions between
cyclosporin and either famotidine or nizatidine that
potentiate nephrotoxicity in transplant patients. Thus,
interpretation of renal function may be confusing with
concomitant administration of cimetidine and

588

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Cornbination

Cyclosporid
H2-antagonistcont.

Interaction

cyclosporin unless the glomerular filtration rate is
accurately monitored. On the basis of the information
currently available, ranitidine may be considered the
H2-antagonist of choice in a patient treated with
cyclosporin.

Erythromycin or
Erythromycin, is metabolized by the cytochrome P450
dirithromycidcyclosporin, enzyme system. By decreasing their metabolism,
terfenadine
erythromycin can interact with other drugs metabolized
theophylline
by the same enzyme system. Since the lack of such
warfarin
interactions would be a desirable feature in a newer
(see review 15)
macrolide, studies were performed to detect any
interaction of dirithromycin with a range of drugs.
Dirithromycin, a new macrolide, did not inhibit the
cytochrome P450 enzyme system. It contrast to
erythromycin or clarithromycin, dirithromycin did not
cause any significant changes in the pharmacokinetics
of cyclosporin, theophylline, terfenadine or warfarin.
ethinyl oestradiol
However, in patient taking low-dose ethinyl oestradiol,
the administration of dirithromycin caused a significant
increase (9.9%) in the clearance of the oestradiol.
Women with low ethinyl oestradiol bioavailability and
increased gastrointestinal transit time may be at risk of
contraceptive failure with this interaction.
Glibenclamidehifampicin Twenty-nine well controlled diabetic patients on a
combination therapy of diet and glibenclamide, and
(16)
willing to participate in the trial, received a daily dose
of 450 mg (body weight 4 0 kg) or 600 mg (body
weight >50 kg) of rifampicin for 10 days. There was a
significant worsening of fasting and post-prandial blood
sugar after administration of rifampicin. Dose
modification of glibenclamide was required in 15 of the
17 patients in whom diabetes became uncontrolled.
Blood sugar normalized by day 6 after stopping
rifampicin in all patients. The mechanism of this
interaction is induction of hepatic microsomal enzymes
by rifampicin causing enhanced metabolism of
glibenclamide. It was concluded that necessary dose
modifications should be made to achieve euglycaemia
if these two drugs are given together.

RECENT AND UNCONFIRMED DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Glyburide/eprosartan
(17)

589

Interaction

The potential for eprosartan, a non-biphenyl tetrazole
angiotensin I1 receptor antagonist, to affect the 24hour plasma glucose profiles in type I1 diabetics
treated with glyburide was investigated in a
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind
(eprosartan-placebo phase only), two-period, periodbalanced, crossover study. All patients received a
stable oral dose (3.75-10 mg/day) of glyburide for at
least 30 days before the first dose of double-blind
medication was administered. Patients were
randomized to receive either 200 mg oral doses of
eprosartan twice daily or matching oral placebo doses
concomitantly with glyburide for 7 days during each
treatment period. After a minimum washout period of
14 days, patients were changed over to the alternate
treatment. Serial samples to measure plasma glucose
concentrations were collected over a 24-hour period on
the day before administration of eprosartan or placebo
and again on day 7. Mean glucose concentrations were
comparable between treatment groups before
administration of eprosartan or placebo. The point
estimate (90% confidence interval) for the ratio of the
average mean 24-hour plasma glucose concentrations
of eprosartan + glyburide to placebo + glyburide after
7 days of administration was 0.96 (0.90-1.01). Thus, it
was concluded that eprosartan did not significantly
alter the 24-hour plasma glucose profile in type I1
diabetic patients who had been previously stabilized on
glyburide.

Imipramine and
The effect of oral ketoconazole (200 mg/day for 14
desipramineketoconazole days) on the kinetics of a single oral dose of
imipramine (100 mg) and desipramine (100 mg) was
evaluated in two groups of six healthy male subjects
(18). This coadministration was associated with a
decrease in imipramine apparent oral clearance from
1.16 to 0.96 h/kg (P < 0.02), a prolongation in
impramine half-life from 16.7 to 19.2 h (P < 0.05) and
a decrease in AUC of metabolically derived
desipramine from 3,507 to 3,180 nmol/l/h (P < 0.05),
whereas concentrations of 2-hydroxy-imipramine were
unaffected. In the subjects given desipramine, no

590

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Imipramine and
desipramineketoconazole
cont.

significant changes in desipramine and 2-hydroxydesipramine kinetics were observed during
ketoconazole treatment. These findings indicate that
ketoconazole, a relative specific inhibitor of CYP3A4,
inhibits the N-demethylation of imipramine without
affecting the 2-hydroxylation of imipramine and
desipramine. This interaction confirms that CYP3A4
plays a role in the demethylation of tricyclic
antidepressants. The authors of this report believe that
this interaction is unlikely to have clinical significance
due to the relatively wide therapeutic range of
imipramines steady-state plasma concentrations (150250 p,g/l) (19) and to the limited degree of inhibition
of imipramines metabolism (about 20%).

Lamotrigine/valproate
(20)

The manufacturers have alerted health professionals to
new data indicating a severe skin reaction in children
receiving its anti-epileptic drug lamotrigine. The risk of
severe, potentially life-threatening reactions, including
the Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal
necrolysis, may be very much higher in children aged
12 years or under than in adults. The estimated
incidence of reactions in children requiring hospital
admission is between 1 in 300 and 1 in 100 patients. In
adults the risk is around 1 in 1,000. The majority of
skin reactions occur at the start of treatment (within 2
to 8 weeks) but some cases have been reported after
prolonged treatment. The majority of patients recover
after drug withdrawal, but some cases have
experienced irreversible scarring and there have been
rare cases of associated death. In addition to age,
apparent risk factors associated with skin reactions
include concomitant use of valproate (which increases
the mean half-life of lamotrigine) and high initial doses
of lamotrigine and exceeding the recommended
dosage.

Midazoladfluconazole
(21)

Midazolam, a widely used short-acting hypnotic, is
extensively metabolized by intestinal and hepatic
CYP3A4 enzyme. Orally ingested imidazole
antimycotics, including fluconazole, interfere with the
metabolism of oral midazolam during its absorption
and elimination

RECENT AND UNCONFIRMED DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

591

Interaction

phases. A study has compared the effect of oral and
intravenous fluconazole on the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of oral midazolam in healthy
volunteers. Results showed that both oral and
intravenous fluconazole significantly increased the
C,,,, the tIl2, and the AUC values of midazolam as
well as its pharmacodynamic effects. The metabolism
of midazolam was more strongly inhibited by oral than
intravenous dosage of fluconazole, thus suggesting the
role of intestinal drug metabolism in the interaction.
Persona contraceptive
systedtetracycline (22)

The manufacturer of Persona contraceptive system
(Unipath) has warned women that it should not be
used if they are taking tetracycline since it may affect
the accuracy of the test. Persona detects a woman’s
fertile period by measuring levels of luteinizing
hormone and oestrone-3-glucuronide (an oestradiol
metabolite) in urine. Tests have shown that, in some
women, tetracycline can increase the level of
luteinizing hormone. Women using Persona should use
a barrier contraceptive if they are prescribed a short
course of tetracycline. If they are taking tetracycline
for more than a month, Persona should not be used.
The problem is only with tetracycline, related
antibiotics, including oxytetracycline, do not affect the
test.

Terfenadine/imidazole
antifungals, macrolide
antibiotics, grapefruit
juice

Terfenadine, until recently an OTC Pharmacy
medicine, is a non-sedating antihistamine which is
widely used without adverse effects. It is a pro-drug
which is converted to fexofenadine as it passes through
the liver after absorption from the gut. Generally, it is
fully metabolized on its first pass and is not present in
the systemic circulation. However, if metabolism is
inhibited or overloaded, the parent drug reaches the
circulation and prolongs the electrocardiograph QT
interval. This predisposes to ventricular arrhythmias,
particularly torsade de points, which may progress to
ventricular fibrillation and death. Terfenadine should
not be taken by patients with cardiac or hepatic
disease and it should not be taken at the same time as
a number of other drugs (e.g. ketoconazole,

592

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

Combination

Interaction

Terfenadinehmidazole
antifungals, macrolide
antibiotics, grapefruit
juice cont.

itraconazole and related imidazole antifungals,
erythromycin, clarithromycin and related macrolide
antibiotics) or with grapefruit juice. In letters posted to
doctors and pharmacists on 23 April 1997, the
Chairman of the Committee on Safety of Medicine
(Professor M. Rawlins) said that the CSM had recently
reviewed the safety of terfenadine in relation to
cardiac arrhythmias and was concerned that serious
adverse reactions to terfenadine continued to be
reported. The UK Medicines Control Agency has
therefore announced that it is taking steps to make
terfenadine a prescription only medicine (POM) (23).
The FDA in the United States has announced its
intention to remove products containing terfenadine
from the US market following the successful
introduction in the US of fexofenadine, a metabolite of
terfenadine, which is claimed to provide the beneficial
effects of terfenadine without the cardiotoxic risk (24).
The French Health Authority has suspended marketing
of terfenadine for 1 year (25).

Warfaridmiconazole gel
(26)

The use of miconazole gel in a 73-year-old man
resulted in loss of anticoagulant control. He had been
given (26) warfarin 2 years previously after coronary
bypass surgery and his condition was well controlled
with 1-3 mg daily. He was prescribed miconazole oral
gel 125 mg (5 ml) four times daily for oral candidiasis.
Before this his international normalized ratio was 1.5.
When repeated 2 weeks later, while using the oral gel,
it was over 10. The miconazole gel and warfarin were
immediately withdrawn and 2 weeks later the INR had
reduced to 3. Warfarin was reintroduced at 2 mg daily
and the ratio remained well controlled in the range 23. Two previous cases of this interaction have been
reported (27, 28).
Potentiation has also occurred with the oral
anticoagulants nicoumalone (29, 30) and phenindione
(31). Together they indicate that the oral gel may be
sufficiently absorbed to interact with other drugs. The
BNF now contains such an appendix warning.

Nicoumalone
phenindione

RECENT AND UNCONFIRMED DRUG INTERACTIONS

593

Meloxicam/diuretics,
and other agents (32)

This NSAID should be used with caution in those
patients taking diuretics, or who have recently
undergone major surgery leading to hypervolaemia;
monitor urine output and renal function in such
patients. Use with caution in concomitant
administration with other NSAIDs, anticoagulants,
ticlopidine, lithium, methotrexate, IUDs, cyclosporin,
antihypertensives, thrombolytics, and oral
antidiabetics.

Risperidone/levodopa
and other dopamine
agonists (33)

Caution should be exercized when treating patients
with Parkinson’s disease or epilepsy. The
antipsychotic, risperidone (Risperdal), may antagonize
the effect of levodopa and other dopamine agonists.
Drugs with dopamine antagonistic properties have
been associated with tardive dyskinesia. If signs or
symptoms of this appear then consider discontinuation
of all antisychotic agents.

Carbamazepine (33)

On initiation of carbamazepine or other hepaticenzyme inducing drugs, the dosage of risperidone
should be re-evaluated and increased if necessary; on
discontinuation of such drugs, the dosage of
risperidone should be re-evaluated and decreased if
necessary.

REFERENCES

1 Rosenblatt M, Mindel J. (1997) N Engl J Med 336, 1108.
2 Rowin J, Lewis SL. (1996) Neurology 46, 1775.
3 Chung KF et al. (1987) Lancet i , 248.
4 Gumbhir-Shah K et al. (1977) J Clin Pharmacol37, 160.
5 Kronbach T et al. (1988) Clin Pharmacol Ther 43, 630.
6 Torregrosa V et al. (1991) Nephron 60, 125.
7 Abu-Romeh SH, Rashed A . (1991) Nephron 58, 237.
8 First MR et al. (1993) Transplantation 55, 1000.
9 Faergemann J et al. (1995) J Am Acad Dermatol32, 750.
10 Shah IA et al. (1993) Br J Dermatol 129, 395.
11 Long LC et al. (1994) J Invest Dermatol 102, 740.
12 Lewis S McK, McCloskey WW. (1997) A n n Pharmacother 31, 363.
13 Barri YM et al. (1993) J Am Soc Nephrol4, 925 (abstract).
14 Zazgornik J et al. (1985) Kidney Int 28, 410. (abstract)
15 Watkins VS et al. (1997) A n n Pharmacother 31, 349.
16 Surekha V et al. (1997) Natl Med J India 10, 11.
17 Martin DE et al. (1997) J Clin Pharmacol37, 155.
18 Spina E et al. (1997) Br J Clin Pharmacol43, 315.
19 Purlanut M et al. (1993) Clin Pharmacokinet 24, 301.

594

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

20 Anon. (1997) Pharm J 258, 499.
21 Ahonen J et al. (1997) Eur J Clin Pharmaco151, 415.
22 Unipath. (1997) Pharm J 258, 433.
23 Anon. (1997) Pharm J 258, 575, 581.
24 Anon. (1997) Pharm J 258, 90.
25 Anon. (1979) Pharm J 258, 260.
26 Ariyaratnam NS et al. (1997) Br Med J 314, 349.
27 Colquhoun MC et al. (1987) Lancet ii, 532.
28 Shenfield GM, Page M. (1991) Aust N Z J Med 21, 928.
29 Marotel C et al. (1986) Paris Med 15, 1684.
30 Ducroix JP et al. (1989) Rev Med Interne 10, 557.
31 Ponge T et al. (1987) Therapie 42, 412.
32 Boehringer Ingelheim (1997) Meloxicam (Mobic), Current prescribing information.
33 Janssen-Cilag (1997) Risperdal. Abbreviated prescribing information. Hospital Doctor,
May 29th 1997, p. 8.

ANNEX 1
The European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products
Human Medicines Evaluation Unit
London, 17 March 1997
CPMP/EWP/560/95

COMMITTEE FOR PROPRIETARY MEDICINAL PRODUCTS
(CPMP)

NOTE FOR GUIDANCE ON
THE INVESTIGATION OF DRUG INTERACTIONS

I

DISCUSSION IN THE EFFICACY WORKING PARTY (EWP)
~

~

TRANSMISSION TO THE CPMP

I

TRANSMISSION TO INTERESTED PARTIES

I DEADLINE FOR COMMENTS

I

March 1997
March 1997

I

595

June/October 1996
February 1997

September 1997

I

596

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

~~

~

THE INVESTIGATION OF DRUG INTERACTIONS
(CPMPEWP/560/95)
This Note for Guidance should be read in Conjunction with the following:
0
0
0
0

0

0
0

0

0
0
0

The CPMP guideline for Good Clinical Practice
The CPMP guideline on Investigation of Bioavailability and Bioequivalence
The CPMP guideline on Pharmacokinetic Studies in Man
The CPMP guideline on Analytical Validation
The CPMP guideline on Biostatistical Methodology in Clinical Trials in Applications for Marketing Authorisations for Medicinal Products
The CPMP guideline on Investigation of chiral active substances
The CPMP safety guideline on Pharmacokinetics and Metabolic Studies in
the Safety Evaluation of New Drugs in Animals
The CPMP safety guideline on Repeated Dose Toxicity
The CPMP safety guideline on Single Dose Toxicity
The CPMP guideline on clinical investigation of medicinal products in children
The CPMP guideline on fixed combination products.

1. INTRODUCTION
As a consequence of the scientific development within the areas of pharmacokinetics
(particularly drug metabolism) and pharmacodynamics, the focus of interaction
studies has changed from ad hoc observational studies to rationally designed studies.
Depending on the chemical characteristics and in vitro data, selective in vivo studies
are performed. Based on results from such studies, the risk of clinically relevant
interactions may be predicted. As a consequence, the information provided to the
prescriber has also become more detailed and scientific.
The objectives of this Note for Guidance is to:
0

0

outline requirements for interaction studies on new chemical entities on the
basis of their physico-chemical properties, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics .
propose a structure for the presentation in the SPC of the information obtained.

In addition, the guideline is aimed at defining the in vivo studies needed and thereby
reduce the number of preclinical and clinical studies.
In this document, an ‘interaction’ is defined as an alteration either in the pharmacodynamics and/or the pharmacokinetics of a drug, caused by concomitant drug
treatment, dietary factors or social habits such as tobacco or alcohol. Other factors
that may interact to alter drug disposition such as age, gender, activity, and time
of administration will not be discussed in this guideline.

ANNEX1

597

2. CLINICALLY RELEVANT INTERACTIONS
It is important in the drug development phase to differentiate between potential
interactions and clinically relevant interactions.
An interaction is ‘clinically relevant’:
0

0

when the therapeutic activity and/or toxicity of a drug is changed and
when concomitant use of the two interacting drugs is likely to occur when
used as therapeutically recommended.

To appreciate fully the potential of a new drug for clinically relevant interactions,
the following aspects should be taken into account during the drug development
program:
0
0

0

0

0

0

Extensive characterisation of the physico-chemical properties of the drug.
Early characterisation of the full pharmacodynamic profile and pharmacokinetic properties of the drug and the factors that may alter these.
In vitro data should mainly be used qualitatively due to the uncertainty
regarding in vitro/in vivo correlation. Thus, based on in vitro data, applicants
should design and perform relevant in vivo studies.
Preferably, both pharmacokinetic and when relevant pharmacodynamic
variables should be studied in the in vivo interaction studies. The clinical
relevance of the results for the in vivo studies should be discussed in light of
the dose-concentration-effect (therapeutic as well as toxic) relationships for
the drug.
The studies should focus both on effects of other drugs on the drug under
investigation and vice versa.
Generally, in vivo studies will be required to support a claim of “No clinically
relevant interactions” in the SPC.

3. PHARMACODYNAMIC INTERACTIONS
Pharmacodynamic actions may include both therapeutic and adverse effects of
drugs. Extensive pharmacological and toxicological knowledge about the drug is
crucial for the performance of a meaningful pharmacodynamic interaction study.
Pharmacodynamic interactions may be caused by a large variety of mechanisms.
It is therefore impossible to give detailed guidance for pharmacodynamic studies,
where the design must be determined on a case-by-case basis. When similar, mechanisms and/or effects are found in animals and in humans, animal studies can be
used to characterise a potential interaction, In general, animal, in vitro and clinical
studies together will better describe the pharmacodynamic interaction profile of a
drug.
Pharmacodynamic interactions studies should be performed:
0

when drugs likely to be coadministered have similar or opposing pharmacodynamic effects.

598

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

0

when drugs likely to be coadministered have potentially similar interacting
mechanisms.
when structurally similar compounds are known to interact with certain other
compounds
In addition, such studies might be warranted for any compound which is to
be commonly used together with the compound under investigation due to
standard therapeutic recommendations.

0

0

When designing pharmacodynamic studies, it must be remembered that:
0

0

0

0

An interaction may be due to direct competition at a particular site of action
or could be indirect involving altered physiological mechanisms or sensitivity
of the systems affected.
Both the therapeutic and the toxic effects can be altered by pharmacodynamic
interactions.
Pharmacodynamic interactions may involve interaction between therapeutic
activity of one compound with toxic effect of another compound.
Therapeutic activity and toxic effect might be affected in different directions
resulting in a modified balance between positive and negative properties,

4. PHARMACOKINETIC INTERACTIONS
4.1. Absorption
This guideline focuses on absorption interactions in the gastro-intestinal tract. Absorption interactions may, of course, occur at absorption sites e.g. following dermal
or nasal administration. It should be noted that a drug given by another route of
administration, e.g. the intravenous route could have an impact on the gastrointestinal absorption, by its pharmacodynamic effect on, e.g. gastro-intestinal secretion or motility.
In the case of an interaction, rate of absorption, fraction absorbed and first-pass
metabolism may be influenced. Normally, a change in the bioavailability is of
particular clinical importance.
In vitro studies may be helpful in investigating transport mechanisms or the
potential of a drug for complex bindingkhelation. However, potential interactions
should be studied in vivo in humans since in vitro absorption studies have been
shown to be of limited value.
When deciding on absorption studies needed, the following should be considered:
0

0

Effect of food and antacids should always be studied with new drugs intended
for oral administration or with new modified release dosage forms.
Other absorption interaction studies should be performed if:
- the dissolution of the drug in question is pH-sensitive
- one of the drugs is known to alter gastric pH
- there is high prevalence of gastrointestinal mucosal disease in the target
population.

ANNEX1

599

When designing absorption interaction studies, it must be remembered that:
Food-related interactions should preferably be investigated early in drug development process so that the information obtained may be considered in the
design of the Phase I1 and I11 studies.
Food or other drugs may influence drug absorption for several hours. If a
significant interaction is demonstrated, the dosage recommendations (i.e. timing of dose in relation to the interacting agent) should be adequately validated
in the clinical situation.
Dosage forms sensitive to food effects should be avoided if possible. It is
threfore important to determine if the food/drug is influencing the drug substance and/or the dosage form.
Factors/mechanisms causing the interaction should be identified wherever
possible.

4.2. Distribution
Displacement of drug from plasma proteins is the most common explanation for
altered distribution in drug interactions. However, few displacement interactions
result in clinically relevant changes,
Displacement interaction studies should be performed when the investigated
drug:
0
0

0

0

0

has a narrow therapeutic index and
is highly bound (>go%) to proteins in human plasma at therapeutic concentrations and
is highly protein bound (>%yo), and occupies most of the binding sites (e.g.
plasma therapeutic concentrations at the highest recommended dose exceed
the plasma binding capacity).
at single dose or initiation of therapy (starting or loading dose) when the
volume of distribution of the investigated drug is small (<10L/70 kg).
when the investigated drug is administered intravenously and possesses a high
metabolic extraction ratio.

When designing displacement interaction studies, it must be remembered that:
0

0

0

0

Displacement studies should be performed in vivo, since the metabolites of
the drug may also be involved in such interactions.
Unbound peak plasma concentration should be determined by estimation of
the unbound fraction at at least three time points.
Changes in unbound plasma concentration may not occur in parallel with the
total plasma concentration.
The methods used must be well documented and validated.

600

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

4.3. Elimination
The majority of known clinically relevant interactions is due to changes in the
elimination of drugs. Therefore, information of immediate interest early in the
development of a new drug is the relative clearance by metabolic and non-metabolic
routes.

4.3.1. Metabolism
The primary metabolic pathway(s) for the drug, and the proportion of the total
clearance, that each primary metabolic pathway constitutes should be determined
at an early stage. Furthermore, the enzyme(s) responsible for the metabolism,
possible polymorphism in the metabolism, inhibiting and inducing potential for the
drug should be investigated. In Table 1 major drug metabolising CYP450 enzymes
are listed (appended).
Depending on the properties of the drug, and the route of adminstration, different
effects on the unbound plasma concentration could be expected when the intrinsic
clearance or the liver blood flow are changed. Furthermore, it has to be taken into
account that the outcome of metabolic drug interactions could be more serious in
cases of steep concentration-response curves.

4.3.1.1. Change of intrinsic clearance
An inhibition or induction of the metabolism resulting in a change of the intrinsic
clearance cause a change of the unbound plasma concentration at steady state for
“low extraction drugs” administered orally or i.v., and for “high extraction drugs”
administered orally. On the other hand, there is no change of the unbound plasma
concentration at steady state for “high extraction drugs” administered i.v.

4.3.1.1.1. Metabolic induction
Clinically relevant induction occurs during chronic exposure to the inducing drug
and is a dose and time dependent phenomenon.
Points to consider regarding metabolic induction:
0
0
0

0

0

Decide if the defined enzyme(s), is (are) inducible or not.
Some time is required for the onset and offset of induction.
When metabolites are pharmacologically active, it should be remembered
that the introduction of an inducer leads to decrease in the pharmacological
activity(ies) of the parent drug, but an increase in that of the metabolites.
The clinical effects of induction might be more serious when the inducer is
abruptly withdrawn.
Many dietary and social habits e.g. smoking or charcoaled meat may induce
drug metabolism.

ANNEXI

601

4.3.1.1.2. Metabolic inhibition
Inhibition is also a dose dependent phenomenon but in contrast to induction,
clinically relevant inhibition occurs readily. In inhibition processes, both the oxidative system, the hydrolyses and the conjugation system may be involved.
Points to consider regarding metabolic inhibition:
0

0
0

0

Most inhibition is competitive and disappears rather rapidly as soon as the
inhibitor is eliminated or decreases after the dose is reduced.
Opposite to induction, inhibition is often enzyme specific.
When metabolites are pharmacologically active, it should be remembered that
the introduction of an inhibitor leads to an increase in the pharmacological
activity(ies) of the parent drug but a decrease in that of the metabolites.
Some dietary constituents are known inhibitors of drug metabolism e.g. grape
fruit juice.

4.3.1.2. Change or blood flow
In general, a change of the blood flow through the liver causes no change of the
unbound plasma concentration at steady state for “low extraction drugs” administered orally or Lv., and for “high extraction drugs” administered orally. On the
other hand, a change of the unbound plasma concentration at steady state for “high
extraction drugs” can be expected ‘if administered i.v.

4.3.1.3. Metabolic interaction studies
Metabolic interaction studies should be performed:
0

0

0

for drugs where metabolism is the prominent route of elimination
for orally admimistered drugs with low bioavailability due to extensive first
pass metabolism.
when a specific enzyme is responsible for more than 30% of the total clearance
of a drug.

When designing metabolic interaction studies, it must be remembered that:
0

0

0

The enzyme kinetic parameters (Ki, Km and Vmax) should be determined
preferably by kinetic modelling. Km allows prediction of the potential of the
drug as a competitive inhibitor of the metabolism of other drugs by a particular
enzyme, and is also used to define the potential of other drugs to inhibit the
metabolism of the new drug. The likelihood for a potential in vivo interaction
depends on the relative Ki and Km of the two drugs involved, and their
relative in vivo concentrations.
Define the potential of the new drug to inhibit drug metabolising enzymes
including important enzymes for which the drug is not a substrate. The Ki for
potent interactions should be determined to allow in vivo predictions.
The interactions predicted from in vitro data should be confirmed in vivo.

602

0
0

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

These in vivo studies should consider the therapeutic index of drugs likely to
be coadministered.
at least one of the potent inhibitors of the specific enzyme should be studied.
If the drug is extensively metabolised, but specific enzymes are unknown,
possible interactions should be studied with generally known “probe” inhibitorshducers.

4.3.2. Renal excretion
Interactions at the level of renal excretion have been reported for many drugs
where renal excretion is the dominant route of elimination. The role of renal
elimination in the excretion of active metabolites is just as important in the context
of such interactions.
For drugs where the renal route is an important route of elimination, interactions
could occur via changes in urinary pH andor urinary flow rate, resulting in changes
in the passive reabsorption, and by competition of active secretion in the renal
tubule.
Renal excretion interaction studies should be performed:
0

0

when the renal elimination is the prominent route of elimination of either
parent and/or pharmacologically active or toxic metabolites and
when the drudactive or toxic metabolite is excreted by active secretion or
there is an indication of significant reabsorption.

When designing renal excretion interaction studies, it must be remembered that:
0

0

0

The alteration of pH is only clinically significant if the pK, value of the drug
is in the range of about 7.5-10.5 for bases, and 3.0-7.5 for acids.
Of the two secretion pathways, the one for acids appears clinically to be the
more important pathway for interactions.
The potential for interactions involving active renal secretion could be studied
using in vitro methods.

Examples of drugs actively secreted into the renal tubule is given in Table 2.

4.3.3. Hepatichiliary excretion
For drugs where the biliary route is an important route of elimination, and for
which a saturation of the excretory capacity of the liver is possible, interactions
caused by competition for hepatic excretion should be considered. Interactions at
the level of hepatic excretion have been reported for a few drugs (e.g. rifampicin).

ANNEXI

603

5. POINTS TO CONSIDER WHEN DESIGNING AND ASSESSING
INTERACTION STUDIES
One advantage of performing drug interaction studies early in the drug development
process is that knowledge of causes for variability, such as food interactions, could
be considered in the design of Phase I1 and Phase I11 studies. Thus, extensive
investigation of potential interactions at an early stage of drug development is
encouraged.

5.1. Mechanism based in vivo studies
When studying the effects of inhibition or induction on the pharmacokinetics or
pharmacodynamics of a new drug, the following should be considered:
in vivo pharmacokinetic interaction studies could most of the time be performed in healthy volunteers, while in vivo pharmacodynamic interaction
studies would preferably be performed in patients. Disease-related interactions should always be considered.
Subjects participating in metabolic in vivo interaction studies should be appropriately phenotyped if any of the active enzymes mediating the metabolism
are polymorphically distributed in the population. In some cases, clinically
relevant interactions may only occur in a subset of the total population, e.g.
for slow-metabolisers when an alternate route of metabolism is inhibited.

5.1.1. Experimental design
When designing interaction studies it must be remembered that:
the pharmacokinetic parameters of the inducer or the inhibitor should be
carefully considered and steady state conditions be achieved whenever possible. Approved therapeutic dose regimen for the selected inhibitor or inducer
may not be optimal enough to obtain a full inhibitory or inducing effect. The
number of daily doses may have to be increased to ensure inhibitiodinduction
during 24 hours. Similarly, the duration of pre-treatment with an inducer
should be sufficient to maximise the influence on the metabolic system.
sufficient time must be allowed to reach a pharmacokinetic steady-state.
the properties of the drugs should be considered in the choice of study design.
In order to reduce variability, a cross-over design is usually the first choice.
Other designs may be chosen in specific situations, but should be justified in
the study protocol. The design of the studies should include randomisation,
and whenever possible double-blind.
In studies involving simple induction or inhibition, it may be adequate to
investigate the effect of one drug on the pharmacokinetics of the drug in
question. However, when the two drugs are substrates of the same enzyme,
it is important to investigate the pharmacokinetics of both the drugs adminis-

604

0

0

0

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

tered singly and in combination to the same cohort in order to evaluate the
effect of each drug on the other.
In most in vivo pharmacokinetic studies it seems reasonable to focus on the
exposure of the drug, AUC and the two variables determining this, i.e. extent
of absorption, F, and clearance (CI). Other parameters may also be of interest
and tlIz.
such as C,
The number of subjects should always be justified. Since the aim often is to
demonstrate that there is no clinically relevant interaction, special attention
should be paid to the risk for a Type I1 error, i.e. the risk for not detecting
a relevant interaction.
the precision of the estimate of the size of any potential interaction must be
considered.

5.1.2. Statistical analysis
In the statistical analysis it should be remembered that:
0

0

0

The statistical analyses of the main treatment effects of interest should in
general be carried out by means of analysis of variance and should include
the calculation of confidence intervals for the estimates of the size of the
effects.
To demonstrate the lack of a relevant interaction, the currently accepted
bioequivalence approach (i.e. the inclusion of the 90% confidence interval for
the ratio/difference of the means within some prespecified equivalence range)
may be appropriate.
If this fails, the point estimate together with the confidence interval should
form the basis for any potential recommendations of dose modifications.

These methods for comparison of means are appropriate in most situations. However, the consequence of an interaction might be increased variability and for drugs
with a narrow therapeutic index designs and methods that focus on analysis of
variability might be necessary. The statistical analysis of variability needs special
attention.
5.1.3. Interpretation of mechanism based studies
It seems reasonable that in vivo studies with inducers/inhibitors may be used to
extrapolate to other inducers/inhibitors of the same enzyme. Similarly, effects of
the new drug on substrates should be transferable to other substrates for the same
enzyme.
5.2. Population pharmacokinetic studies
It is often valuable to include a population approach in Phase II/III clinical trials
to screen for pharmacokinetic drug interactions. Valuable additional information is
then obtained from studies that are performed for other reasons. It is, however,

ANNEXI

605

important to remember that in the context of the population approach, these studies
are not randomised and may therefore be subject to the usual bias of observational
studies. The outcome should mainly be used as hypothesis-generating and the best
use of this approach can probably be made to highlight unsuspected interactions
and possibly to confirm absence of suspected interactions. The successful use of
such an approach is highly dependent upon the protocol inclusion criteria so that
0

0

sufficient numbers of patients taking the potentially interacting drug exist (to
avoid falsely not finding an interaction)
information should be available as to when the interacting drug was taken,
and should be within a reasonable time frame with respect to when the test
drug was administered.

In order to avoid drawing incorrect conclusions, in particular false negative conclusions, certain aspects of analysis need special attention, because the statistical
models and computational procedures used to analyse population pharmacokinetic
studies can be particularly complex. It is important to ensure that the particular
models chosen and procedures used are reliable, and are appropriate for the statistical distribution of the data. In addition, the influence of potential confounding
factors, such as age, on the results and conclusions should be checked, bearing in
mind the lack of randomisation and the possibility for bias.
A confidence interval associated with the estimate of the interaction should be
presented. This is particularly important if no significant interaction is detected in
order to permit an assessment of the degree of interaction potentially excluded.

6. INFORMATION IN THE SPC
The information in the SPC should follow the general guideline outlined in the
Notice to Applicants. However, the increased knowledge of factors influencing
potential interactions and the possibility to study these factors in a selective mechanistic way also influences the way in which such information is provided to the
prescriber. An information solely based on mechanisms is probably not sufficient
and the information should be clarified with examples, Relevant information should
be included under the headings as outlined below. As pointed out below, serious
clinical interactions should also be described either under “4.3 Contraindications”
or “4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use” in the SPC. It should also be
noted that lack of knowledge regarding drug interactions is not only an issue for
the SPC, but could for a given drug, influence the risWbenefit assessment in the
final opinion.

6.1. Clinical particulars
Examples of SPC-texts related to drug interactions are given below:

606

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

4.3. Contraindications
Drug X prolongs the QT interval and is contraindicated in patients treated
with . . . . . . . . .

4.4. Special Warnings and Precautions for Use
Drug X may prolong the QT interval and should be used with caution in patients
concomitantly treated with . . . . . , . . .
4.5. Interactions
Results from performed in vivo studies in humans should be described under this
heading together with potential interactions predicted from in vitro studies but not
studied in vivo. It is important to clearly differentiate between effects of other drugs
on the investigated drug, and effects of the new drug on other drugs. In vivo results
showing lack of interaction could also be included when this information is valuable.
The potential for renal interactions with other drugs has to be stated when the renal
elimination is 50% of the total elimination.
The information could be worded as follows:

Drug X is an inhibitor of CYP3A4 and has been shown to increase the levels of
triazolam. Hence, caution is advised when X is given together with other substrates
for CYP3A4 such a s . . . . The pharmacokinetics of X were not influenced by the
CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole.
Drug X has been shown to induce serotonergic syndrome in combination with
MAO-inhibitors. Treatment with Y should not begin until two weeks after the cessation of treatment with MAO-inhibitors.
As mentioned above, the text should also discuss potential interactions which have
not been addressed by the applicant. If relevant in vivo studies are not performed,
the following text provides an example based on the results from performed in vitro
studies:

Although interaction studies have not been performed, due to the potential enzyme
induction, drug X should not be combined with drugs which are metabolised by
CYPlA2and which exhibit a narrow therapeutic index, such as . . . .
or

Although interaction studies have not been performed, since this drug is metabolised
by CYP3A4,it is expected that ketoconazole, itraconazole, grape fruit juice . . . . . .inhibit the metabolism. On the other hand, inducers of this enzyme such as rifampicin,
phenytoin . . . . . .may reduce the levels of the drug. Since the magnitude of an inducing or inhibiting effect is unknown, such drug combinations should be avoided.
or

The haemodynamic properties of digoxin, noradrenaline and adrenaline would be

ANNEXI

607

expected to be potentiated in combination with drug Y .Hence, caution is advised if
these drugs are given concomitantly.
6.2. Pharmacology

Relevant pharmacokinetic, metabolic and pharmacodynamic properties of the drug
should be summarised under 5 , e.g.

5.1. Pharmacodynamics
Drug X is an inhibitor of the reuptake of serotonin and noradrenaline.

5.2. Pharmacokinetics
Drug X i s mainly metabolised by CYP3A4and has demonstrated a capacity to induce
this enzyme and CYPlA2in vitro.

608

A MANUAL OF ADVERSE DRUG INTERACTIONS

7. APPENDIX
7.1. Table 1: The major drug metabolizing CYP450 enzymes, examples of substrates,
inhibitors, inducers and markers.
'450 ENZYME

I SUBSTRATES

INHIBITORS

[NDUCERS

MARKERS

:YPlA2

Acetaminophen
Aromatic amines
Caffeine
Phenacetin
Theoph ylline

Fluvoxamine
Furafylline

Charcoal-broiled Caffeine
beef
Cigarette smoke
Cruciferous
vegetables

IYP2C9

NSAID drugs
Phen ytoin
Tolbutamide
S-Warfarin

Sulfaphenazole
Sulfinpyrazone

Rifampicin
Barbiturates

S-Warfarin
Tolbutamide

:YP2C19

Citalopram
Diazepam
Hexobarbital
Imipramine
Omeprazole
Proguanil
Propranolol

Tran ylcypromine

Rifampicin
Barbiturates

Mefenytoin
Omeprazole

IYPZD6

Several antidepressants
Neuroleptics
Beta-blockers
Antiarrhythmics
Codeine
Dextromethorphan
Etylmorphine
Nicotine

Ajmaline
Chinidin
Fluoxetine
Paroxetine
Quinidine
Ritonavir

None known

Debrisoquine
Dextromethorphan

2YP2E1

Acetaminophen
Alcohols
Caffeine
Chlorozoxazone
Dapsone
Enflurane
Theophylline

Diethyldithiocarbamate
Dimethyl
sulfoxide
Disulfiram

Ethanol
Isoniazid

Caffeine
Chlorozoxazone

IYP3A4

Acetaminophen
Carbamazepine
Cyclosporin
Digitoxin
Diazepam
Erythromycin
Felodipine
Fluoxetine
Nifedipine
Quinidine
Saquinavir
Steroids (e.g.
cortisol)
Terfenadine
Triazolam
Verapamil
Warfarin

Clotrimazole
Ketoconazole
Ritonavir
Troleandomycin

~

~

Dexamethasone
Phenytoin
Rifampicin
Troleandomycin

Dapsone
Erythromycin
Ketoconazole
Lidocaine

ANNEXI

7.2. Table 2: Examples of drugs actively secreted into the renal tubule
ORGANIC ACIDS

ORGANIC BASES

acetazolamide
some cephalospotins
chlorpropamide
hippuric acid
indomethacin
loop diuretics
methotrexate
oxyphenbutazone
penicillins
phenylbutazone
probenecid
salicylic acid
sulphonamides
sulphonic acids
thiazide diuretics

amantadine
amilotide
cimetidine
dopamine
ethambutol
meperidine
metformin
N-methylnicotinamide
morphine
procainamide
d-pseudo ephedrine
quinacrine
triamterene

609

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Index
This index is divided into two main parts. Index A deals with drugs and associated events. Index B
contains a Table of Drug Incompatibilities (in vitro) and a Table of Drug Interactions (in vivo). In these
tables individual pairs of interactants are listed in alphabetical order.

Index A: Drugs and Associated Events
Acebutolol 147, 150, 151
Absorption (sorption), to plastics 550
Acarbose 212, 411, 414
ACE inhibitors 41, 87, 97, 119, 172, 221, 223,
225, 226, 228, 418, 447, 488, 495, 533,
535, 564, 567
Acebutol 419
Aceclofenac 493
Acematacin 493
Acenocoumarol 184, 185
Acepifylline (piperazine theophylline
ethanoate) 247
Acetaminophen (paracetamol) 27, 57, 58, 574
Acetanilide 57, 63, 70
Acetazolamide 30, 60, 96, 126, 130, 140, 219-22,
422, 460, 487, 521
Acetohexamide 71, 411
Acetone 27
Acetyl digoxin 113
Acetyl salicylic acid 6
Acetylator status 64
Acetylators, slow 395
Acetylcholine (ophthalmic) 497
Acipimox 210, 213
Aclarubicin 468
Acrivastine 266
Acrosoxacin 387
Acrysof and silicone intraocular lenses 560
Actilyse 179, 180
Actinomycin D 455
Acyclovir 34, 398, 400, 459, 460
Addisons disease 432
Adenosine 115, 127, 128
ADH antagonists 30
Adonis vernalis 66
Adrenaline 60, 135, 152, 235-7, 267, 269, 411,
413, 518, 559
Adrenergic neurone blocking drugs 161-5
interactions 161-5
Adrenoceptor stimulants, non-selective, 235, 236
Adrenochrome 51
Adriamycin 400
Adsorbents 487
Adsorption 49
to plastics 550
Adverse reactions due to poor microsomal
oxidation (Table 16) 63
Aflatoxin B1 27

Age and genetic factors 53-64
Age, relation to clearance of drugs by hepatic
biotransformation (Table 13) 58
Ageing, physiological, key changes (Table 10) 54
Agranulocytosis 63
AIDS 576
medicines 576
Albumin 13, 424
Albuterol (see salbutamol) 256
Alclofenac 60
Alcohol 25, 26, 27, 58, 60, 134, 155, 162, 171,
179, 182, 213, 267, 269, 376, 380, 396,
399, 414, 415, 459, 480, 487, 488, 533,
539, 545, 555, 565, 566, 568-70
acute or chronic intake 564
dehydrogenase 25
interactions 563-71
metabolism 563
Alcuronium 525, 527, 528
Aldesleukin 171
Aldose reductase inhibitors 411
Aldosterone 429
antagonists 30
Alendroate sodium 574
Alfentanil 382
Alfuzosin 238
Alkylating agents 467, (list) 468
interactions 471-3
Allopurinol 26, 34, 155, 183, 228, 259, 385, 449,
456, 472, 476, 478, 479, 481
Alphal-acid glycoprotein 13
Alpha-adrenergic blocking agents 166, 168, 169,
234
Alphal-blockers 564, 567
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors 411
Alphaxalone 60
Alprazolam 58, 449
Alprenolol 147
Alrestatin 411
Alteplase (TPA) 179, 180, 203, 204
Althiazide 217
Aluminium 60
hub, syringe needle 474
hydroxide 95, 97, 120, 495
/magnesium complexes 97
Amantadine 34, 228, 364, 369, 400
Ambenonium chloride 574
Amethocaine (tetracaine) 389, 517, 519

611

612

INDEX

Amidopyrine 60
Amikacin 373, 528
Amiloride 34, 96, 124, 137, 218, 220-2, 422
Amino acids 65, 473, 476
Aminoglutethimide 60, 411
Aminoglycoside antibiotics 55, 135, 222-4, 267,
(list) 373; 373-5, 395, 400, 437, 460, 478,
528
Aminohexane diphosphonate (AHDP,
meridronic acid) 574
Aminohippuric acid 30
Aminophylline 42, 92, 225, 242, 249, 258, 274,
275, 473, 474, 522
Aminopyrine 57, 70, 260, 511, 577
Aminosalicylates 70, 105
Amiodarone 102, 115, 116, 119, 120, 130, 135,
137, 148, 159, 179, 183, 249, 264, 459,
477, 482, 550, 552
interactions 128-30
sorption to plastics 47
Amiodipine 157, 158
Amitriptyline 6, 57, 58, 60, 62, 70, 162, 163,
169, 191, 365, 481
Ammonium chloride 274
A M 0 S1-18NB intraocular lenses 560
Amobarbital 57, 58
Amodiaquine 553
Amoxycillin 6, 85, 86, 93, 250, 384, 385, 575
+ clavulanic acid (co-fluampicil) 384
Amphetamines 25, 40, 60, 164, 165, 168, 237,
240
Amphotericin 124, 275, 373, 397, 398, 401, 460,
522
Ampicillin 57, 106, 384-6, 441-3, 522, 575
+ cloxacillin 384
Amsacrine 470
Anabolic steroids 413, 415
Anaesthetics 25, 40, 149, 159, 160, 172, 238
local 389
Ancrod 180, 203
Androgens 50
Angiotensin 236
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors 56
interactions 153-7
Animal substances in herbal in herbal
medicines 537
Anion exchange resins 209, 212
Anise tea 545
Anisindione 70, 177, 178
Anistreplase (Eminase) 180, 181
Annexe 1595-609
Antacids 5 5 , 86, 88, 97-9, 120, 134, 138, 141,
186, 187, 257, 380, 382, 385, 387, 390,
396, 437, 487, 495, 574, 575
Anthoxanthum odoratum (sweet vernal
grass) 542
Anti-arrhythmic agents 119, 127, 130, 133, 138,
148, 249, 482

Anti-arrhythmic agents (conrd)
(Classes I-IV) 115-9, 213
Anti-emetics 430
Anti-epileptics 564, 566, 569
Anti-inflamrnatory/antirheumatic agents 65
Anti-Parkinsonian drugs 138
Antiasthma agents 538, 539
Antibacterials 133
Antibiotics 509
macrolide 272
Anticholinergics 138
Anticoagulants 64, 171, 177-205, 212-4, 444,
502, 503
(indanediones) 192
and fibrinolytics, interactions 177-205
and thrombolytic agents, injected, interactions
203-5
coumarin 86, 94, 128, 177-205, 385, 387, 391,
413, 416, 437, 488, 546, 565, 566, 592,
593,
interactions 182-203
indanedione derivatives 177
indirect 177-205
intravenously administered 179-82
Anticonvulsants 64, 101, 129, 131, 133, 139, 212,
223, 474, 566
Antidepressants 55, 56, 564, 569, 589, 590
serotonin re-uptake inhibitor 26, 252, 449, 566,
567, 577
Antidepressants, MAOIs 12, 26, 150, 163, 166,
172, 190, 237-41, 267, 365, 366, 368, 370,
449, 528, 532, 566, 573, 576, 577
Antidepressants, tri- and polycyclic 162-164,
166, 172, 191, 213, 237, 241, 267, 271,
365, 366, 370, 393, 449, 518, 540, 566, 577
Antidiabetic agents, sulphonylureas 191, 212,
219, 220, 392, 393, 398, 421, 422, 472,
489, 495
Antidiabetic agents 150, 542, 543, 567, 588, 589,
593
(table) 411; 411-24, 430
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), drugs affecting
secretion (list) 481
Antiepileptic agents 159, 160, 252, 443, 444
Antifungal agents (list) 397; 397-400, 586
Antifungals, imidazoles 272, 394
Antihistamines 66, 119, 129, 131, 135, 137, 139,
265-77, 564, 569, 587, 588
H2-antagonists 265, 377, 381
non-sedative 266
sedative 266
Antihypertensive agents 223, 227
centrally acting, interactions 165-73
Antihypertensives 56, 66, 96, 139, 160, 169, 171,
534, 593
interactions 147-75
vasodilators 170, 171
Antimalarials 124, 129, 135, 151, 191, 192, 271,
385, 509

INDEX

Antimetabolites (list) 469-70
interactions 475-8
Antimicrobial agents 119, 373-407
Antimicrobials, absorption enhanced by nutrients
(Table 4) 577
Antimicrobials, absorption reduced by nutrients
(Table 2) 575
Antimuscarinic agents (list) 365; 370, 457
Antineoplastic agents, interactions 467-84
Antioxidants 47
in plastics 550
Antipsychotic agents 131, 139, 151, 155, 168,
369, 564, 569
Antipyrine (phenazone) 57, 58, 62, 70, 150, 539
Antispasmodics 66
Antithyroid agent 192
Antituberculous agents 393-7
Antiviral agents (list) 400; 400-1
Anxiolytics 169, 267, 269
Apomorphine 364, 369
Apparent volume of distribution 22
Appetite suppressants 496
Aprindine 129
Apronalide 60
Aprotinin 529
Arecoline 538
Arrhythmias, malignant ventricular 63
Arrhythmias, supraventricular 115-7
Arrhythmias, ventricular 116-8
Arvin 180
Arylamine and its promutagens 27
Ascorbic acid 473
Asilone sodium alginate 97, 200
Asperula odorata (sweet woodruff) 542
Aspirin 97, 163, 180, 184, 204, 213, 226, 413,
430, 449, 477, 487-91, 493, 498, 500, 565,
585
and salicyltes 34, 35, 55, 57, 60, 420, 421
interactions 487-91
Astemizole 102, 119, 129, 131, 137, 139, 151,
265, 266, 270-2, 381, 382
Asthma 227
sudden deaths 237, 238
Atenolol 6, 147-149, 253, 574
ATPO sodium/potassium transport step 30
Atracurium 456, 457, 462, 526-9
Atreonam 376
Atropa belladonna 66
Atropine 50, 60, 115, 180, 238, 267, 525, 527,
530
Azapropazone 60, 184, 413, 421, 493-5, 498,
501, 502
Azathioprine 156, 455-8, 469, 475
teratogenicity 456
Azatidine 266
Azithromycin 98, 382, 575
Azlocillin 385, 386, 388
Azosemide 218
Azuresin 70

613

Bacampicillin 384
Baclofen 155, 172, 532-534
Bambuterol 235, 241-3, 256, 432
Banisteriopis vines with Pschotria leaves
(ayahuasaca drink) 538
Barbiturates 26, 40, 60, 179, 195, 196, 267, 269,
275, 399, 522
Barium 50
BCG vaccine 253, 510, 511
Beclofibrate 209
Beclomethasone 6, 429
Bee sting 157
Bemegride 60
Bemetizide 217
Bendrofluazide 217
Bendroflumethiazide 6
Benorylate 493
Benserazide 363
Benzalkonium chloride 52
Benzhexol 365
Benzo(a)pyrene 27
Benzocaine 389, 517, 519
Benzodiazepines 40, 42, 45, 46, 202, 367, 394,
396, 550
Benzoyl peroxide 52
Benztropine 365
Benzyl penicillin 384
Benzylhydrochlorothiazide 217
Benzylpenicillin 274, 275
G 575
Berberine 538
Berberis aristata 538
Beta-adrenergic blockers 42, 64, 114, 116, 129,
132, 137, 147-52, 155, 160, 166, 171, 172,
180, 253, 365-7, 394, 413, 414, 417-9,
424, 447: 495, 519, 530, 564
Beta-adrenergic blocking drugs,
cardioselective 147
Beta-adrenergic blocking drugs, combined a- and
P-blockers 147
Beta-adrenergic blocking drugs, noncardioselective 147
Beta-adrenoceptor antagonist 56
Beta-carotene 538
Beta-endorphin 436
Beta-methyl digoxin 113, 574
Beta2-adrenoceptor stimulants, selective 235
Beta,-agonists 227
Beta2-sympathomimetic amines (list) 432
Betamethasone 6, 429
Betaxolol 147
Betel nut (Areca catechu) 538
Bethanidine 60, 161-3
Bezafibrate 209-11
Bicarbonates 87
Bicuculline 40
Biguanides 60, 163, 411
Bilirubin 19
diagnostic test 496

614

INDEX

Bishydroxycoumarin 183
Bismuth carbonate 120
Bismuth subnitrate 93, 95
Bisoprolol 147
Bisphosphonates 12, 98, 436, 437, 574, 575
Bleomycin 468, 473
Botanicals in herbal medicines 537
Bran (high fibre meal) 539, 540
Bran plus psyllum biscuits 540
Bretylium 115, 117, 119, 130, 135, 162
Brofaromine 12
Bromfenac 586
Bromides 60
Bromocriptine 364, 369, 370, 383, 399, 463, 568
Brompheniramine 266, 274
Buclizine 266, 267
Budesonide 6, 429
Bufuralol 147
Bumetanide 60, 114, 126, 218-20
Bunitrolol 147
Buperiden 365
Buphenine 268
Bupivacaine 60, 90, 517, 520
Bupranolol 147
Buprenorphine 60
Busulphan 60, 468, 471, 478
Butacaine 389, 519
Butanilicaine 517, 518
Buthiazide 217
Butyrophenones 367-70
C-peptide 423, 426
Cafazolin 71
Caffeine 27, 388, 449
Calciferol 141, 142
Calcitonin 437
Calcitonins, pork, eel, salmon, synthetic
human 435, 436
Calcium adipate 141, 142
Calcium carbonate 120, 227
Calcium channel blockers 114, 115, 130, 139,
155, 157-61, 172, 180, 203, 254, 394, 413,
419, 420, 459, 482, 489, 542, 567
Calcium chloride 274
Calcium gluconate 502
Calcium supplements 575
CAMP 471
Canrenoate potassium 218
Canrenone 71, 72, 218
Caplenal 203
Capreomycin 373, 395
Captopril 6, 40, 63, 153, 155-7, 225, 413, 418,
460, 495, 574
Caraway tea 545
Carbamazepine 14, 40, 42, 26, 60, 90, 159, 179,
189, 190, 223, 252, 268, 382, 391, 396,
441, 443, 460, 481, 552, 553, 566, 593
Carbenicillin 57, 275, 375, 385

Carbenoxolone 26, 55, 57, 95, 96, 155, 227, 432
Carbidopa 363, 574
Carbimazole 63
Carbomer (carboxypolymethylene) 52
Carbon tetrachloride 26
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 487
Carboplatin 44, 470
Carbromal 60
Carbutamide 411
Carcinogen (NNK) 27
Cardiac glycosides 66, 113-4, 119-27, 137, 398,
494
Cardiomyopathy 468
children 463
Carisoprodol 532
Carmellose sodium 51, 52
Carmustine 468
CART 471
Cascara 70
Catecholamines 420
Catheters, multilumen 44, 45
Caved S 95
Cyclopenthiazide 217
Cefaclor 376, 575
Cefadroxil 376
Cefalexin 6
Cefamandole 57
Cefazoline 57
Cefixime 376, 575
Cefodizime 376
Cefoperazone 275, 376
Cefotaxime 376, 385, 460
Cefoxitin 71, 376
Cefpodoxime 98, 376, 377
Cefprozil 575
Cefradin 57
Cefsuladin 376
Ceftazidime 376, 460
Ceftizoxime 376
Ceftriaxone 376
Cefuroxime 376, 460, 577
axetil 34
Cellulose acetate 48
Cellulose esters 549, 553
Cellulose filters 473
Cellulose propionate 48
Centella asiatica 545
Cephalexin 60, 376, 575
Cephaloridine 187
Cephalosporins 34, 55, 60, 460, 575
and related p-lactam antibiotics (list) 376; 376,
377, 386
Cephalothin 71, 275, 474
Cephamandole 376, 563, 564, 568, 569
Cephazolin 376, 522
Cephradine 460, 575
Cepridil 119
Cetibuten 575
Cetirizine 266

INDEX

Chelates and complexes 93
Chemotherapy, combination (list) 470; 471
Chickenpox 474
Chinese toad (Bufo bufo gargarizans) 543
Chirality 18, 493
Chiroflex intraocular lenses 560
Chloral betaine 197
Chloral hydrate 60, 197, 223
Chlorambucil 60, 455, 456, 468, 472
Chloramphenicol 6, 26, 52, 60, 187, 274, 275,
377, 378, 413, 415, 449, 477, 560
Chlordiazepoxide 57, 58, 60, 179, 196, 202, 367,
413, 449
Chlorinated hydrocarbon pesticides 26
Chlormethiazole 51, 57, 60, 550, 551, 553, 558,
568
Chlormethiazole edisylate 47, 49
Chlormethiazole, sorption to plastics 47
Chlormezanone 60
Chloroform 60
Chloroquine 43, 47, 60, 70, 96, 119, 124, 125,
129, 269, 385, 509, 551, 553, 554, 574
Chlorothiazide 217, 227, 275
Chloroxazone 27
Chlorphenesin 532
Chlorpheniramine 60, 266
Chlorpromazine 25. 31, 40, 49, 52, 55, 60, 61,
63, 98, 155, 164, 169, 275, 411, 413, 431,
558
Chlorpropamide 35, 60, 163, 191, 377, 389, 411,
413, 414, 415, 416, 421, 422, 481, 489,
543, 564, 567
facial flush 414, 567
Chlortetracycline 98, 274, 575
Chlorthalidone 57, 60, 126, 217, 219, 422
Chlorzoxazone 70, 532
Cholesterol 211
high density 210
low density 209
Cholestyramine 179, 198, 209, 212, 213, 227,
414, 496
Choline theophyllinate 247
Cholinergic drugs 136, 137, 140
Ciclomethasone 429
Cilastatin 376, 401
Cilazapril 153
Cimetidine 6, 26, 31, 34, 42, 55, 57, 60, 70, 87,
88, 90-2, 102, 130, 132, 135-7, 151, 160,
179, 192-4, 257, 258, 272, 377, 378, 387,
391, 394, 413, 421, 429, 449, 457, 460,
476, 520, 521, 531, 568, 587
Cimetidine (R and S isomers) 89
Cinafloxacin 251
Cinnarizine 265, 266
Cinoxacin 387, 388
Ciprofibrate 209, 211
Ciprofloxacin 26, 96, 98, 250, 251, 387, 388, 501,
539. 559. 575
Cisapride 90, 101, 102, 119, 381, 383

615

Cisplatin 44, 52, 373, 374, 395, 470, 473, 478,
479
-induced emesis 430
Cladribine 469
Clarithromycin 85, 102, 123, 249, 272, 382, 383,
588, 592
Clear-Flex bags 550
Clemastine 266
Clindamycin 379, 528
Clobazam 58, 60
Clodrionate 98
Clofazimine 39, 41, 577
Clofibrate 26, 34, 60, 179, 194, 209-12, 413, 421,
422, 481, 546
interactions 212
Clonazepam 60
Clonidine 60, 142, 151, 156, 165, 166, 419
Clopamide 217
Clorexolone 217
Clorgyline 12
Clotrimazole 6, 380, 463
Cloxacillin 384, 575
CNS acting drugs (list) 480
Co-amiloride 221
Co-beneldopa 363
Co-careldopa 365
Co-dergocrine 242
Co-magaldrate 97
Co-trimoxazole 55, 79, 187, 389, 392, 401, 413,
415, 456, 457, 460
COAP 471
Cobalt chloride 26
Cocaine 40, 60, 65, 517
Codeine 60
Cola ilex 539
Cola nut 539
Colaspase 479
Colchicine 60, 65, 228, 460
Colestipol 209, 212, 213, 227, 431, 496
Colistin 60, 373, 374, 376, 386, 395, 528
Conjugated oestrogens 435
Contac 400, 496
Contac 500 496
Contact lens, materials 43
Contact lenses, plastic 51, 105, 551
Contraception, intra uterine device 441
Contraluminal transporters 31
Contrast media 275
Convallaria majalis 66
Convolvulus pluricaulis 545
COPP 471
Corticosteroids 26, 41, 60, 65, 96, 1054, 119,
156, 167, 171, 172, 194, 220, 227, 235,
248, 267, 383, 394. 411, 430, 431, 432,
436, 447, 449, 455, 456, 459, 463, 469,
487, 489, 495, 496, 507
interactions 429-38
topical 64
with major glucorticoid effects (list) 429

616

INDEX

Corticosteroids (contd)
with major mineralocorticoid effects (list) 429
Cortisone 429
Cortivazol 429
Cortisol 449
Coticotrophin 227
Coumarin anticoagulants 177-205, 365
interactions 182-203
Coumarin yielding herbs (list) 542
Creatinine, colourimetric and enzymatic
analysis 71
Crisantaspase 470
Crohns disease 105
Cromoglycate 6, 248
Cumin tea 546
Cyclizine 60, 266, 267
Cyclobenzaprine 532
Cyclodiene insecticides 40
Cycloguanil 192
Cyclooxygenase-1 (Cox-1) 493
Cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) 493
Cyclopenthiazide 447
Cyclophosphamide 26, 57, 60, 156, 378, 411,
413, 455, 468, 472, 481, 531
Cyclopropane 60, 120, 527, 551
Cycloserine 396
Cyclosporin 27, 41, 43, 90, 211, 225, 381, 383,
389, 394, 399, 429, 431, 449, 455, 458,
459, 461, 462, 482, 495, 496, 509, 510,
542, 550, 551, 554, 577, 586-8, 593
Cyclosporin, drugs decreasing serum levels
(table) 460
Cyclosporin, drugs enhancing nephrotoxicity
(list) 460
Cyclosporin, drugs increasing serum levels (list)
459; 460
Cyclothiazide 217
Cyproheptadine 266, 267, 269, 270
Cystisus coparius 545
Cytarabine 455, 469, 475, 476, 478
syndrome 469
Cytochrome P448 92
Cytochrome P450 25, 42, 88, 92159, 160, 161,
193, 258, 259, 273, 382, 383, 399, 431,
458, 507, 509-12, 587, 588
CYPlA2 27, 252, 576
CYP2A 27
CYP2A6 27
CYP2A7 27
CYP2B 27, 28
CYP2B6 27
CYP2B7 27
CYP2C 27, 28
CYP2C9 27
CYP2ClO 27
CYP2C17 27
CYP2C18 27
CYP2C19 27
CYP2D 27

Cytochrome P450 (contd)
CYP2D6 27, 545
CYP2D7P 27
CYP2D8P 27
CYP2E 27, 28
CYP2El 27
CYP2F 27, 28
CYP2F1 27
CYP3A 27, 463, 586
CYP3A3 27, 429
CYP3A4 27, 101, 273, 429, 576, 590
CYP3A5 27, 429
CYP3A7 27, 429
enzymes, mammalian 28
human (Table 5 ) 27
-inducers 429, 430;(list) 441
-inhibiting agents 429
Cytochrome P450s, human xenobioticmetabolizing 28
Cytotoxic antibiotics (list) 468, 469
Cytotoxic antibiotics, interactions 473-4
Dacarbazine 470
Dactinomycin (actinomycin D) 468, 473, 474
Danazol 26, 60, 194, 195, 460, 577
Danthron 70
Dantrolene 161, 532, 533
Dapsone 60, 63, 400, 401
Datura stramonium 66
Daunorubicin 70, 455, 468, 474
Debrisoquine 27, 161, 162, 270
Decamethonium 375
Dedlazacort 429
Deferoxamine mesylate 70
Deglycyrrhizinsed liquorice 95
Demecarium 528
Demeclocycline 390, 575
Deoxycortone acetate (DOCA) 429
Depolarizing muscle relaxants 530-2
Depolarizing neuromuscular block 528, 530-2
Desalkylflurazepam 58
Desipramine 57, 162, 191, 241, 269, 589, 590
Deslanoside 113
Desmethyldiazepam 57, 58
Desogestrel 423, 440, 446
Dexamethasone 26, 27, 60, 429, 430, 463, 473,
474, 559, 560
suppression test 496
Dexamphetamine 237, 240
Dexfenfluramine 237, 240
Dextran 275
sulphate 560
Dextrins 203
Dextromethorphan 40
Dextropropoxyphene 26, 184, 565
Dialysis membranes, high-flux 156
Diamine oxidase 25
Diamorphine 60

INDEX

Diatrizoate meglumine 559
Diatrizoate salts 274
Diazepam 6, 14, 47, 49, 57, 58, 60, 86, 88, 202,
367, 396, 449, 476, 529, 533, 550, 554,
558, 559
Diazepam, sorption to plastics 47
Diazoxide 41, 60, 170, 171, 411, 418, 478
Dibenzepin 191
Dichloralphenazone 60, 197
Dichlorodifluoromethane (propellant 12) 238
Dichlorotetrafluoromethane (propellant 114) 238
Dichlorphenamide 219
Diclofenac 6, 35, 60, 493, 494, 496-9
Dicoumarol (bishydroxycoumarol) 26, 60, 177,
178, 189-91, 416
Didanosine 575, 576
Diethyl propion 237, 240
Diethylhexyl phthalate, plasticizer (DEHP) 60,
550-2, 557
Diethylpropion 164
Diflunisal 184, 493, 495, 500, 501
Digitalis species 66
Digitalis compounds (see also digitoxin,
digoxin) 60
Digitalis glycosides 114, 398, 471, 531
Digitalis preparations 148
Digitalis, prepared 113
Digitoxin 14, 58, 113, 114, 116, 122-14, 226, 394
Digoxin 6, 19, 34, 55, 57, 65, 71, 72, 86, 94-6,
98, 106, 113, 114, 116, 120, 127, 129, 130,
141, 142, 156, 222, 225-7, 229, 374, 383,
391393, 394, 461, 539, 541, 574
interference with serum determinations 226
-specific antibiodies (Digibind) 114
-specific antibody fragments (F(ab)) 114
Dihydrocodeine 271
Dihydroergotamine 152, 242
Dihydropyridine 159
Dihydropyridines 158-61
Dihydrostreptomycin 57
Diloran 200
Diltazem 6, 40, 125, 130, 148, 157-61, 394, 414,
420, 459, 460, 463
Dimenhydrinate 60, 267, 275
Dimethicone 97
Dimethicone, activated 120
Dimethothiazine 368
Dimethylformamide 26
Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) 70
Dimethyltryptamine 538
Dinoprostone (prostaglandin E2) 498
Diodone 275
Dioxin 26
Diphadione 70
Diphenadione 177
Diphenhydramine 60
Diphenoxylate 127
Diphenylhydramine 267, 268, 271, 274
Diphenylpyridine 267

617

Diphylline 34
Dipipanone 271
Diprophylline (diphylline,
dihydroxypropyltheophylline) 247
Dipteryx odorata (tonka bean) 542
Dipyridamole 96, 115, 127, 475, 487
Dipyrone sodium 62
Dirithromycin 588
Disodium clodronate 374
Disodium etidronate 374, 436, 437
Disodium pamidronate 374, 435-7
Disopyramide 14, 60, 63, 102, 115-117, 119, 128,
130, 131, 135, 149, 370, 382
interactions 130, 131
Distigmine 374
Disulfiram 195, 254, 381, 449, 458, 539, 563,
569.
Diuretic, ethacrynic acid 195
Diuretics 56, 113, 119, 126, 131, 134, 140, 141,
156, 162, 171, 172, 195, 217-31, 254, 271,
430, 447, 481, 495, 497, 593
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 219, 487
frusemide (furosemide) 30
interactions 217-29
loop 30, 34, 35, 55, 96, 126, 130, 218, 220,
229, 374, 497, 521
mercurial 219
osmotic 218
potassium losing 222
potassium sparing 218, 221, 461, 495
thiazides 30. 34, 62, 69, 96. 128, 130, 140, 152,
212, 217-221, 227-9, 411, 413, 417, 422,
460, 497, 521
tubular transport system and sites of actiuon
(Fig. 6) 30
Divalent and trivalent cations 390, 474
DOAP 471
Dobutamide 413
Docetaxal (Taxoterene) 550, 551
Domperidone 60
Dopa 166
-decarboxylase inhibitor 363, 364
Dopamine 11, 166, 180, 236, 365, 502
antagonists 593
Dopaminergic agents 363, (list) 364, 365, 369,
370
Dopexamine 236, 239
Dorzolamide 219
Dothiepin 6
Doxazosin 168, 169
Doxepin 413
Doxorubicin (adriamycin) 70, 401, 455, 468, 474,
476, 477
Doxycycline 6, 57, 251, 390, 391, 459, 575
Doxylamine 266
Droperidol 60
Drostanolone 183
Drug absorption or bioavailability increased by
nutrients 576

618

INDEX

Drug binding, influence of acetyl salicylic acid 21
Drug displacement from binding sites 21-4
Drug displacement, therapeutic
consequences 21-4
Drug displacement, warfarin by
phenylbutazone 21
Drug distribution and elimination 19-21
Drug Interactions and mechanisms,
commentary 3-80
Drug interactions, influence of genetic
factors 62-4
Drug interactions, pharmacodynamic 39-72
Drug plasma protein binding, influence of
diseases (Table 2) 14-7
Drugs exhibiting sorption to plastics (list) 550
Drugs, absorption enhanced by nutrients (Table
3) 577
Drugs, absorption, reducd by nutrients (Table 1)
574
Drugs, causing leaching of DEHP from PVC
bags (list) 550
Dynamics of drugs, age-related alterations 53, 56
Econazole 380
Ecothiopate 520
eye drops 528, 531
Ectasy (3,4-methylene dioxymethamphetamine) 40, 237
Edrophonium 140, 375, 528, 530
EDTA 60
Eformoterol 432
Elderly patients 53-62
Elderly patients, altered drug
pharmacodynamics 56
Elderly patients, changes of drug parameters 56,
(Table 12) 57, 58
Emiglitate 411
Eminase 181
Emodin 70
Enalapril 6, 153-5, 225, 226, 413, 418
Enflurane 60, 527
Enoxacin 26, 250, 251, 387, 539
Enoximone 114
Enprofylline 34
Enzyme inducers (Table 3) 26
Enzyme inhibitors (Table 4) 26
Epalestat 411
Ephedra species 66
Ephedrine 31, 65, 66, 127, 164, 165, 235, 236,
256
Epinephryl 559
Epirubicin 468
Epithiazide 217
Epoprostenol (prostacyclin) 180, 181, 203
Eprosartan 589
Ergot alkaloids 65, 142, 242
Ergot preparations 60
Ergotamine 152, 242, 243, 383, 463

Erythromycin 6, 26, 27, 60, 102, 119, 122, 123,
130, 138, 179, 187, 214, 249, 270-2, 382,
383, 429, 459, 463, 575, 588, 592
Erythropoietin 41
Esmalal 147
Estramustine 468
Ethacrynic acid 126, 195, 218-20, 222, 223, 228,
374
Ethambutol 98, 106, 123, 397
Ethamivan 275
Ethchlorvynol 60, 197
Ether (diethyl) 60, 527
Ethinamate 60
Ethinyloestradiol 27, 439-22, 463, 588
Ethionamide 471
Ethoglucid 468, 470, 479
Ethosuximide 60, 62, 396, 441, 443, 566
Ethotoin 61
Ethoxazena 70
Ethvinyl acetate 47
Ethyl biscoumacetate 177, 178, 219
Ethylenediamine 248
Ethyloestrenol 183
Ethylvinyl acetate 549, 553
Ethynodiol 439, 440
Etidronate 98, 574
Etimodate 60
Etinidine 91
Etodolac 493, 496, 503
Etofylline (hydroxyethyltheophylline) 247
Etomidate 527
Etoposide 460
Etozolin 218
Eucalyptol 60
Eucalyptus species 540
Eucalyptus oil 540
Excipients 51, 52
Factor V Leiden mutation 445
Famciclovir 400
Famotidine 34, 87, 88, 91, 257, 531, 587
Fasinopril 153
Fazidinium 379, 386, 526
Felbamate 26, 189, 190
Felodipine 157-60, 254, 577
Fenbufen 488, 493
Fenclofenac 421
Fenfluramine 162, 227, 237, 240, 413
Fenofibrate 209-1 1
Fenoprofen 493
Fenoterol 119, 235, 241-3, 256, 432
Fenretinide 577
Fentanyl 60, 160
Feprazone 502
Ferrous salts (see also iron) 6, 70
Fexofenadine 591, 592
Fibrinolytics 177-205
Flavonoids 161, 461, 576

INDEX

Flecainide 15, 88, 96, 115, 117, 119, 120, 128,
130, 135, 159, 574
Fleroxacin 251
Flucloxacillin 6, 384
Fluconazole 26, 102, 179, 187, 253, 272, 273,
380, 381, 397, 413, 417, 443, 59, 586, 590,
591
Flucytosine 397-401
Fludarabine 469, 475
Fludrocortisone 429
Flufenamic acid 60
Flumazenil 40
Flumethasone 429
Flunarizine 255, 265-7
Flunisolide 429
Flunitrazepam 58, 60
Fluorescine 51
Fluorocarbon 11 238
Fluoromethalone 429
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics 94, 250, 251
Fluorouracil 42, 44, 381, 455, 469, 474-6, 478,
499
Fluoxetine 272, 369, 461
Flupenthioxol 482
Fluphenazine 481
Fluprednisolone 429
Flurazepam 186
Flurbiprofen 57, 60, 184, 185, 224, 494, 497, 500
Fluroxine 60
Fluvastatin 211
Fluvoxamine 150, 252, 271
Folate, deficiency-like states 63
Folic acid 106, 229, 448
Follicle stimulating hormone (FH) 4242
Food mutagens 27
Foods and beverages, rich in tyramine (Table 5)
578
Foods, mineral content (Table 6) 578, 579
Foscarnet 400
Fosinopril 97
Framycetin 528
Frusemide (furosemide)6, 34, 55, 60, 71, 114,
119, 126, 128, 218-25, 228, 275, 374, 429,
457, 460, 473, 478, 497
Furazolidone 63, 70
Fusidic acid 6, 60, 379
GABA receptors 532
Gabapentin 40
Gallamine 526-9
Ganciclovir 400, 401
Ganglion blocking agents 170
interactions 170
Garlic (Alliumsativurn) 540, 541
Gastric motility agents 119
Gaviscon 97
Gemcitabine 469
Gemfibrozil 209-11, 213, 214, 411, 413

619

Genetic polymorphism test 270
Gentamicin 57. 60, 223, 373-5, 380, 385, 502,
528, 559
Gestodene 440, 446
Ginkgo biloba 585, 586
Ginkgolide B 585
Ginseng (Panax ginseng) 541
Glaspak 557
Glass 46, 554-556
borosilicate 553
laboratory ware 551
siliconized 551
soda 551
Glaucoma 64, 140, 161. 374, 379, 531
Glibenclamide 26, 142, 191, 225, 411, 413, 416,
542, 588
Glibornuride 411, 416
Glicazide 411
Glimepiride 411
Glipizide 60. 204, 411, 415, 417
Gliquidone 411
Glisetide 411
Glisolamide 411
Glisoxepide 411
Glomerular filtration 20-1, 29
Glucagon 26, 420, 424
Glucocorticoids 26, 420, 429
Glucose injection 502
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency 64
Glutethimide 61, 197
Glyburide 589
Glybuzole 411
Glyceryl trinitrate (nitroglycerin) 49, 51, 169,
550, 555
sorption to plastics 47
Glycopeptide antibiotics 379
Glycopyramide 411
Glycopyrronium 274, 525
Glycyclamide 411
Glycyrrhetinic acid 544
Glycyrrhizin 543, 544
Glymidine 411, 417
Gold preparations 61
Gold salts 499
Gon 195, 546
Grapefruit juice 160, 161, 179, 188, 273, 274,
461, 541, 542. 576, 592
Griseofulvin 41, 61, 397, 399, 400, 441, 443, 471,
489, 564, 577. 586
Growth hormone 420
Guanethidine 60, 161, 163, 366, 413, 417
Guanfacine 460
Guar gum 386, 411, 542
Guvacoline 539
Gynaecomastia 88, 471
(list of drugs causing) 471
H2-receptor antagonists 64, 130

620

INDEX

Haemolysis, drugs causing in G6PD deficiency
(Table 15) 63
Halfenate 413
Halofantrine 40, 102, 119, 129, 271
Haloperidol 119, 131, 139, 365, 369, 370, 394,
481, 545
Halothane 61, 248, 527
Helicobacter pylori 85, 87, 93
Heparin 55, 60, 114, 177, 180, 181, 202, 204,
274, 275, 374, 413, 417, 474, 556
Hepatic adenoma 63
Hepatic extraction ratio 20, 23
Hepatitis A vaccine 6
Hepatitis B vaccine 457, 509
Herbal and other non-orthodox remedies 3, 65-7
Herbal medicines, contaminated or
adulterated 537
Herbal remedies, constituents and interactions
(Table 18) 66
Herbal remedies, interactions 537-548
Herbal remedies, types (Table 17) 66
Herpes zoster 474
Hexamethonium (obsolete) 170
High density cholesterol 210
High fibre diet 540
Histamine, foods, high content 395
HMG CoA reductase group 210, 211
HMG CoA reductase inhibitors 211, 213, 214
interactions 214
Hodgkins disease 471
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) 152, 435,
533
Hydantoins 61
Hydralazine 457, 61, 171, 172, 478, 550, 577
hydrochloride, sorption to plastics 47
Hydrochlorothiazide 61, 217, 221, 223, 227, 228
Hydrocortisone (cortisol) 6, 256, 274, 275, 429,
431, 432, 447, 474, 479
Hydroflumethiazide 217
Hydrotalcite 97
Hydroxyamphetamine 236
Hydroxychloroquine 96, 124
Hydroxyquinoline sulphate 52
Hydroxyurea 455, 470
Hydroxyzine 266, 274, 275
Hyoscine 61
N-butyl bromide 61
Hyoscyamine 66
Hyoscyamus niger 66
Hypnotics 169, 267, 269, 564, 569
Hypoglycaemics (see also antidiabetic agents) 64,
542, 543
Hypotensive therapy (see also
antihypertensives) 162, 430
Hypoxanthine 25
Ibuprofen 6, 34, 35, 61, 152, 185, 494, 501, 503,
577

Idarubicin 70, 468
Ifosfamide 468, 472
Imidazoles, antifungals (list) 380; 381, 397, 529
Imipenem 376, 401, 460
Imipramine 15, 40, 57, 58, 61, 63, 162, 191, 240,
241, 365, 449, 533, 589, 590
Immunoassay, enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) 71
Immunoassay, fluorescence (FIA) 71
Immunoassay , homogenous enzyme multiplied
immunotechnique (EMIT) 71
Immunoassay, radioimmunoassay (RIA) 71
Immunosuppressants 64, (list) 455
Immunosuppression and cancer chemotherapy,
interactions 455-65
Indanediones 177, 192
Indapamide 217, 422
Indigotindisulphonate 70
Indobufen 413, 421
Indole derivatives 204
Indomethacin 34, 35, 57, 61, 70, 152, 156, 169,
185, 228, 448, 457, 460, 493, 495-8, 500,
502, 503
sodium injection 502
Indoprofen 57
Indoramin 168, 169238, 244
Industrial solvents 26
Inflammatory bowel disease, drug therapy 105,
106
Influenza 259, 260
vaccine 6, 26, 198, 259-61, 510-2
virus infection 512
Ink cap fungus (Coprinus atramentarius) 539
Inosine pranobex 400
Insulin 41, 49, 61, 163, 243, 413-6, 418, 423,
424, 429, 446, 472, 476, 479, 489, 550,
551, 555, 556
interactions 413, 414
sorption to plastics 47
classification 411; (table) 412;
Interactions, agents used to treat gastrointestinal
disease 85-99
Interactions, agents used to treat pepic
ulceration 85-99
Interactions, antiarrhythmic agents 127
Interactions, at plasma and tissue binding
sites 13-24
Interactions, at the absorption site 11, 12
Interactions, at the receptor and other active
sites 39-42
Interactions, cardiac drugs 113-46
Interactions, clofibrate 212
Interactions, diuretics 217-29
Interactions, drugs affecting gastrointestinal
motility 101-3
Interactions, drug-excipient 51, 52
Interactions, drug-foods 3, 4, 11, 39
Interactions, drug metabolizing enzymes 25-8

INDEX

Interactions, herbal remedies and orthodox
medicines 65-7
Interactions, histamine2-blocking agents 87-92
Interactions, HMG CoA reductase inhibitors 214
Interactions, in elderly patients (Table 11) 55
Interactions, in vitro 43-52
Interactions, influence of age and genetic
factors 53-64
Interactions, interference with laboratory
testing 69-72
Interactions, involving cardiac glycosides 119-27
Interactions, involving drug displacement.
consequences 21-4
Interactions, involving renal clearance (Table
6) 32
Interactions, involving renal excretory
mechanisms 29-35
Interactions, involving renal tubular
reabsorption 34, 35
Interactions, involving renal tubular secretion 31,
34
Interactions, literature 4
Interactions, models 5
Interactions, nicotinic acid derivatives 213
Interactions, omega-3-triglycerides 214
Interactions, sympathetic amines 235-244
Interactions, pharmacodynamic, mechanisms
(Table 8 ) 40, 41
Interactions, pharmacokinetic 11, 12
Interactions, plasma protein-binding
displacement 13
algorithm 213
Interactions, proteins involved in drug binding 13
Interactions, proton pump inhibitors 85-7
Interactions, sites of drug-drug and drug-food
(Fig. 1) 5
Interactions, synergistic 39, 41, 42
Interactions, theophylline derivatives 247-64
Interferon 260, 401, 507-9
CY 254, 508, 510, 512, 513
p 198, 508, 513
Y l b 508, 509
CYZb 198, 513
Interleukin 2 470
Interocular lens, hydrogel 559
Intra-uterine contraceptive device 431
Intraocular pressure, raised (see also glaucoma)
64
Intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUDs) 593
Intravenous fluids, additives 44-6
Iodipamide salts 274
Iothalamate salts 274
Ipratropium 40, 243
Iproniazid 26, 190
Iron salts 55, 96, 98, 391, 437, 539
Iron sorbitex 70
Iron supplements 575, 576
Isobutane 238
Isocal 195

621

Isocarboxazid 190
Isoconazole 380
Isoenzymes 25
Isoetharine 235
Isoflurane 527
Isoniazid 26, 58, 61, 98, 179, 249, 250, 381, 395,
396, 411, 413, 414, 432, 449, 460, 575,
Isoprenaline 235, 236, 240
Isopropylantipyrine 62
Isopropylmeprobamate 61
Isosorbide dinitrate 49, 550, 556, 559
sorption to plastics 47
Isosorbide mononitrate 6
Isoxsuprine 236
Ispaghula husk 540
Isradipine 157-9
Itraconazole 26, 41, 98, 102, 124, 270-2, 380-2,
397, 443, 459, 577, 592
Josamycin 382; 383, 463
Kabikinase 182
Kaempferol 273
Kanamycin 50, 57, 188, 274, 373, 375, 528
Kaolin 127
Karela (Momordica charantia) 422
Ketamine 61, 248, 527
Ketanserin 119
Ketoconazole 26, 27, 94, 96, 98, 102, 137, 2702, 370, 380-2. 413, 417, 443, 459, 463,
564, 577, 586, 589, 590, 591
Ketoprofen 34, 61. 185, 493, 494, 499, 500-2
Ketoralac trometamol 493
Ketotifen 266
Kinetics of drugs, age-related alterations 53, 56
L-Asparginase 474, 475
L-Dopa (see also levodopa) 40
L2 471
Labetalol 81, 147, 151, 577
Lacidipine 157, 158
Lactic acidosis 63, 414. 416, 421, 567
Lactulose 6, 71
Lamotrigine 590
Lanatoside C 113, 114
Lansoprazole 85, 86
Latamoxef 188, 376, 460
Laxatives 127, 437, 574, 575
Leaching 46, 50
from plastics 550
Levodops 70. 156, 167, 172, 363-8, 574, 593
plus carbidopa 534
Levomepromazine 57
Levonorgestrel 423, 439, 440, 443, 446
Levorphanol 271
Levothyroxine 6

622

INDEX

Lignocaine (lidocaine) 27, 15. 42, 56, 57, 58, 61,
86, 88, 91, 114, 115, 118, 132-5, 149, 180,
429, 517, 519-22, 550
Lignocaine, sorption to plastics 47
Lincomycin 379, 528, 575
Lipid lowering agents 119
anion exchange resins 209. 212
fibrate type 209, 214
H M G CoA reductase group 210, 211
interactions 209-16
muscle damage 211, 212
nicotinic acid derivatives 210
omega-3 marine triglycerides 211, 214
squalene synthetase inhibitors 211
Lipid regulating agents 413
Liquorice 543, 544
derivatives 95, 96
tea 546
Lisinopril 6, 153, 155
Lithium 34, 57, 61, 64, 99. 157, 167, 220, 221,
227-9, 254, 381, 391, 478, 479, 494. 498,
534, 540, 593
Lithium, drugs altering tubular reabsorption
(Table 7) 35
Local anaesthetic, containing adrenaline or
noradrenaline 518
Local anaesthetics, amide type 517
Local anaesthetics, ester type 517
Local anaesthetics. interactions 517-23
Lomefloxacin 26, 251
Lomustine 255, 468, 472
Loratidine 266
Lorazepam 57, 58. 61, 367, 550, 554
Lorcainide 15
Lovastatin 210, 211, 214
Low density cholesterol 209
Low-density lipoprotein apheresis 560
Lubricants 47
in plastics 550
Luminal transporters 31
Luteinizing hormone 441
Lymecycline 390
Lymphomas 471
Lysuride 364, 369
Macrogols 52
derivatives 52
Macrolide antibiotics 102, 119, 122, 272
(list) 382
interactions 382, 383
Magaldrate 97
Magic mushrooms (Psilocybe semilanceatal) 545
Magnesium carbonate 97
Magnesium ions 50
Magnesium oxide 120
Magnesium peroxide 120
Magnesium salts 530
Magnesium sulphate 522

Magnesium trisilicate 97, 98, 120, 384
Magnolol 543
Male impotence 88, 151, 169
Male sex hormones 436
Malignant hyperpyrexia 64
Mamordica charantia 543
Mandelamine 61
Mandragora ofjicinarum 66
Mannitol 30, 218
MAO-A 364, 538
MAO-B 364
MAOIs (see also antidepressants, MAOIs) 150,
162, 166, 172. 190, 237, 241, 267, 370, 573
Maxepa 214
Mazindol 162, 167
Mebanazine 190
Mebendazole 413
Mebutizide 217
Mecamylamine (obsolete) 61, 170
Mecillinams 385
Meclobemide 577
Meclofenamate 503
Meclozine 61
Medazepam 202
Medicinal plastics (list) 549, 554, 555
drug interactions 549-61
Medigoxin @-methyl digoxin) 114
Medrysone 429
Mefenamic acid 61, 185, 493, 503
Mefloquine 40, 119, 124, 125, 129, 151, 509, 553,
554
Mefruside 126, 217
Meglumine 275
Melanin 19
Melilotus officinalis (sweet clover) 542
Meloxicam 493, 593
Melphalan 455, 460, 468, 473
Membrane filter, plastic 553
Mephenazine 651
Mephenesin 532
Mephentermine 164, 236
Mephentoin 27, 61
Mepivacaine (prilocaine) 518
Meprednisone 429
Meprobamate 61
Mequitazine 266, 268
Mercaptopurine 455, 457, 476, 477
Mercury compounds 61
Mersalyl 61, 219
Mesalazine 105
Mestranol 439
Metabolic acidosis 422
Metals, toxic in herbal medicines 537
Metaproterenol (see isoprenaline) 256
Metaraminol 236
Metencephalin-induced flush 415, 567
Metformin 34, 61, 63, 163, 414, 416, 417, 421,
542, 567
Methacrylate butadiene styrene 48, 49, 549. 553

INDEX

Methacycline 575
Methadone 61, 271, 393
Methandienone 183, 449
Methandriol 183
Methazolamide 219
Methdilazine 368
Methenamine mandelate 61
Methenolone 183
Methicillin 275
Methocarbamol 70
Methohexitone 271, 522
Methotrexate 34, 57, 385, 389, 393, 455, 470,
475-8, 487, 489, 494, 498, 499, 593
Methoxamine 236, 275
Methoxsalen 544, 577
Methoxyflurane 61, 527, 551
Methpyrolone 61
Methsuximide 61, 62
Methyl salicylate 199
Methyl testosterone 460
Methylcellulose 52
Methylclothiazide 217
Methyldopa 61, 70, 71, 162, 167, 366, 369, 413,
447, 449, 567, 574
interactions 166-8
Methylene blue 70
Methylene chloride 238
Methylphenidate 61, 164, 449
Methylprednisolone 429, 459
Methythiouracil 192
Meticrane 217
Metirosine 169
Metoclopramide 15, 61, 103127, 365, 369, 370,
487
Metolazone 217, 225, 460
Metoprolol 39, 57, 58, 63, 86, 137, 142, 147,
149, 150, 151, 253, 447, 487, 519, 577, 578
Metronidazole 6: 61, 70, 85, 93, 179. 188, 380,
381, 529, 563, 569
Metyrapone 61
Mevastatin 210
Mexamethyl melamine 468
Mexiletine 40, 63, 96, 115, 118, 133, 134, 249,
370
interactions 133, 134
Miconazole 102, 179, 380, 381, 398, 413, 463,
550, 551, 590, 591
gel 592
Midazolam 27, 381, 383, 429, 463, 542, 577
Midecamycin 382, 383
Miglitol 411
Milk and dairy products (Ca) 388, 391
Milk-alkali syndrome 27
Milrinone 114
Mineralocorticoids 429, 430
Minerals 65
Minocycline 390, 398, 575
Minoxidil 157, 172: 173
Mint tea 545

623

Misoprostol 88, 93, 96
Mithramycin 474
Mitobronitol 468
Mitomycin 469, 475
Mitotane 226
Mitoxantrone 70, 469
Mivacurium 526-8
Moclobemide 12, 545, 566
Monoamine oxidases 25
inhibitors 413, 449
type A 11, 12 566
type B 11, 12
type B inhibitor 364
Monochlorodifluoromethane (propellant
142b) 238
MOPP 471
Moricizine 26
Morphine 25. 57, 61, 65. 180: 271, 274, 275, 449
Multi-drug resistance, drugs modulating (list) 482
Multivitamins 476
Muscle relaxants, non-depolarizing 161
Muscle relaxants, not at neuromuscular junction
(list) 532; 532-4
Mustine 531
hydrochloride 455, 468
Muzolimine 218
Myasthenia gravis 140, 375, 379, 456, 525
Mydriatics 138

N-acetyl-benzoquinoneimine564
N-acetylprocainamide 117, 119
N-nitrosodiethylamine 27
Nabumetone 493
Nadolol 147, 253, 519
Nafcillin 179, 575
Nalbuphine 275
Nalidixic acid 61, 188, 189, 250, 251, 384, 387,
388, 473
Nandrolone 183
Nauhazoline 236
Naphthylamine 27
Naproxen 6, 34, 35, 61, 185, 493, 494, 499, 500,
501, 503
Napthalene 63
Narcotic analgesics 42, 271, 530
Nardostachys jatamansi 545
Naringenin 273
Naringin 273, 576
Nasal decongestants 236
Nefedipine 6
Neoarsphenamine 63
Neomycin 52, 123, 189, 373-5, 386, 414, 528
Neostigmine 61. 137, 140, 141, 374, 379, 525-8,
530
Nepeta elliptica 545
Nepeta hindostana 545
Nephrotoxicity 218, 373, 380, 395, 478
Nerium oleander 66

624

INDEX

Netilmicin 57, 373, 374
Neuroleptics 267, 269
Neuromuscular blocking drugs (see also skeletal
muscle relaxants) 525
depolarizing 525-32
non-depolarizing 525, 528-30
Neuropathy 63
Nialamide 190
Nicardipine 125, 157-60, 459, 482
Nicofuranose 210
Nicotine 34
acid 210, 214, 275
derivatives 210, 213
interactions 213
Nicoumalone 26, 128, 177, 178, 195, 212, 214,
219, 376, 377, 382. 387, 389, 392, 393,
398, 399, 502, 503, 592
Nifedipine 114, 125, 139, 148, 157-60. 203, 254,
394, 420, 429, 462. 463, 482, 528, 542,
577, 627
ethnic difference in kinetics 159
Nifenalol 119
Night cramps 533
Nikethamide 61
Nimesulide 493
Nimodipine 157, 158
Nisoldipine 577
Nitrates 43, 49, 133, 167, 180, 203, 551, 567
sublingual 390
Nitrazeepam 6, 57, 58, 61, 449
Nitrendipine 160, 574, 577
Nitrofural 63
Nitrofurans 384
Nitrofurantoin 41, 61, 63, 70, 98, 275, 384, 388,
577
Nitroglycerin (see also glyceryl trinitrate) 6, 559
Nitrosamine 27
Nitrous oxide 61
Nizatide 87, 88
Nizatidine 587
Non-orthodiox medicines 537
Son-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) 461, 477, 488, (list) 493, 494;
495, 497, 498
Noradrenaline (norepinephrine) 40, 152, 161,
164-6, 227, 236, 239, 241, 269, 274, 365,
518
Nordiazepam 86
Norepinephrine 559
Norethandrolone 183
Norethindrone 423, 446
Norethisterone 6, 439, 440, 442, 446, 459
Norfloxacin 26, 98, 250, 251, 387. 398, 460, 501.
575
Norgestimate 440
Nortriptyline 42, 56-8, 61, 63, 241, 413, 533
Note for guidance on the investigation of drug
interactions 595-609
Novobiocin 61

NSAIDs 34, 35, 41, 5 5 ; 56, 65, 93, 152, 156,
166, 172, 183, 220, 221, 224, 228, 229,
387, 593
interaction 494-505
ophthalmic 497
Nutrient-drug interactions 573-83
Nutrients causing delayed drug absorption 574-6
Nylon 549, 556
Nystatin 397, 400

OAP 471
Octafluorocyclomethane (propellant 12) 238
Octreotide 413
Oestrogens 61, 152, 157, 172, 411, 431, 423, 439,
443, 445
enterohepatic circulation 442
Oestrone-3-glucuronide (E3G) 441
Ofloxacin 2696, 98, 387, 501, 575
Oleandomycin 382, 575
Olsalazine 105
Omega-3 marine triglycerides 211, 214
interactions 214
Omeprazole 6, 79, 85, 85, 88, 200, 271, 381, 459,
463
Ondansetron 430
Onosma bracieatum 545
Ophthalmic preparations 237
Opioid analgesics 267, 269, 493, 564, 569
Oral contraceptives 3, 61, 63, 152, 157, 164, 167,
172, 375, 378, 384, 386, 394, 400, 411,
413, 422, 423, 431, 439-49, 459, 533
drugs theoretically potentiating (list) 449
interactions 439-51
post-coital 440
progestogen-only 439, 440, 442
thromboembolic disorders 444-6
Oral hypoglycaemics (see also antidiabetics, oral)
214, 472, 479, 429, 487
Orciprenaline (metaproterenol) 235, 256
Organophosphorus compounds 26
Orphenadrine 365
Osteoarthritis 493
Osteoporosis 575
drug treatment, interactions 435-8
Othodox drugs in herbal medicines 537, 538
Ototoxicity 218, 222, 267-9, 373, 380, 395, 470,
478
Oxandrolone 183
Oxazepam 57. 58, 61, 202
Oxazolidinediones 61
Oxcarbamazepine 441, 443
Oxedrine 236
Oxidative genetic polymorphism 64
Oxipurinol 456
Oxprenolol 147, 168. 495
Oxymesterone 183
Oxymetazoline 236
Oxymetholone 183

INDEX

Oxypentifylline 61
Oxyphenbutazone 186, 502
Oxytetracycline 6, 274, 390, 413, 575
Packaging, pharmaceutical 43
Paclitaxel (Taxol) 50, 470, 550, 551
Pagets disease 435
Pamaquine 63, 70
Pamidronate 98, 574
Pancuronium 61, 456, 457, 526-9
Pantoprazole 85, 86
Papaver somniferum 66
Para-aminohippuric acid 30
Para-aminosalicylic acid 449
Para-phenetidine 25
Paracetamol 6, 27, 61, 65, 184-6, 378, 449, 487,
493, 503, 564, 565
Paraffin oil 6
Paraflutizide 217
Paraldehyde 47, 61, 551, 556, 557
Paramethadione 61
Paramethasone 429
Parathyroid 229
extract 126
Pargyline 61
Parkinsons disease 375
Parkinsonism, antimuscarinic drugs 365
Parkinsonism, interactions, drugs used in
treatment 363-371
Paroxetine 25
Paulina species 539
Pausinystalia yohimbine 546
Pectin 127, 540
Pempidine (obsolete) 170
Penflutizide 217
Penicillamine 61, 96, 99, 457, 499, 530, 574
Penicillin G 57, 375
Penicillin V 6, 375
Penicillins 21, 31, 34, 40, 61, 71, 250, (list) 384;
384-6, 391, 442, 476, 575
antipseudomonal (list) 385
broad spectrum (list) 384, 385
penicillinase resistant (list) 384
Pentamidine 400, 401
Pentaquine 63
Pentazocine 61
Pentobarbitone 274
Pentolinium (obsolete) 170
Pentostatin 470, 476, 479
Pentylenetetrazol 61
Perfloxacin 26, 250, 251, 387
Pergolide 364, 369, 370
Perindopril 153-5
Perindoprilat 153, 154
Permeation 46, 49-51
through plastics 550, 551
Peroxidases 25
Persona (Unipath) 441

625

Persona contraceptive system (Unipath) 591
Pesticides in herbal medicines 537
Pethidine (meperidine) 40, 58, 61, 271, 275, 369,
480
Pharmacogenetic disorder 62-4
Pharmacogenetics 64
Phenacemide 71
Phenacetin 27, 70
Phenazone 61
Phenazopyridine 70
Phenelzine 12. 61; 190, 532
Phenformin 61, 391
Phenindamine 266, 268
Phenindione 70, 177, 178, 179, 190, 212, 377,
592
Pheniramine 61, 266
Phenobarbitone (phenobarbital) 27, 57, 63, 131,
139, 159, 189, 252, 275, 378, 380, 381,
391, 394, 399, 441, 443, 444, 460
Phenolphthalein 70
Phenolsulphonphthalein (PSP) 70
Phenoperidine 61
Phenothiazines 19, 56, 61, 70, 119, 129, 151,
162, 164, 168, 213, 275, 367, 368-70, 448,
449. 471, 480, 482,
sorption to plastics 47
Phenoxybenzamine 61
Phenoxymethyl penicillin (see also penicillin
V) 384, 386
Phenoxypropazine 190
Phenozybenzamine 168, 169
Phenprocoumon 89, 177, 178, 193. 194, 416
Phensuximide 61, 62, 70
Phentermine 237, 241
Phentolamine 165, 168, 169, 366, 480
Phenylbutazone 5, 15, 26, 35, 55, 57, 58; 61, 63,
179, 184, 186, 413, 421, 472, 490, 493-5,
501, 502
Phenyldimethyl pyrazolone 62
Phenylephrine 162, 164, 165, 236, 237, 240
Phenylethylamine 11
Phenylhydrazine 61, 63
Phenylpropanolamine 165, 168, 236, 239-41, 496
Phenyramidol 449
Phenytoin (diphenylhydantoin) 15, 26, 42, 43, 45,
57, 58, 61, 63, 70, 86, 88, 90, 94, 115, 118,
129, 131, 133, 139, 159, 187, 189, 190,
196, 213, 214, 252, 253, 275, 378, 389-2,
384, 389, 391-4, 396, 399, 401, 411, 429,
441, 443, 444, 460, 474477, 487, 490, 495,
501, 510, 522, 530, 544, 545, 552, 564,
566, 576, 586
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors 114
Phytomenadione (vitamin K,) 177, 179, 185, 195,
202
Picrorhiza kurroa 544
Picrotoxin 40
Pilocarpine 66, 559
Pilocarpus pennatifolius 66

626

INDEX

Pimozide 102, 119, 131, 365
Pindolol 34, 147
Pipemidic acid 250, 251, 539
Piper longum 544
Piper nigrum 544
Piperacillin 385
Piperine 544
Pipobroman 468
Pippete, plastics tipped 554
Piracetam 365
Pirbuterol 235, 241-3, 256, 432
Piretanide 218
Pirifibrate 209
Piroxicam 13, 35, 179, 186, 488, 493, 494, 497,
500, 503
Pituitary function test 270
Pivampicillin 96, 98, 384, 385
+ pivmecillinam 384
Pivmecillinam 385
Plafibride 209
Plantago ovata 6
Plasma and tissue binding, influence on
kinetics 19
Plasma expanders 203
Plasticers 550
Plastics (see also medicinal plastics) 47, 549-60
drug sorption (list) 550
materials 479, 521
Plastipak 557
Plicamycin (mithramycin) 437, 469
Polidexide 209
Polyacrylonitrile 549
(AN69) dialysis membrane 560
Polybutadiene 49, 549
Polycarbonate 47, 549
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 26, 27
Polyethoxylated castor oils (Cremophor EL) 459,
470
Polyethylene 48, 49, 549, 550, 551, 553-6
Polygeline 424
Polymer compounds, used in pharmaceutical
packaging (Table 9) 48
Polymethylmethacrylate 560
Polymyositis 455
Polymyxins 386, 373, 528
Polyolefin 549, 540, 554-6
Polyoxyethylated castor oil 50
Polypropylene 47, 48, 49, 549, 551, 553-7
-ethylene copolymer 556
Polysorbate 80 50
Polystyrene 47, 48, 51, 549. 551, 553, 556
Polythiazide 217
Polyurethane 549
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 47, 48, 49, 51, 521,
549-57, 559
Ponalrestat 411
Porphyria, drugs associated with (Table 14) 60
Porphyria, drugs believed not to precipitate
(Table 14) 60

Porphyria, porphyrin synthesis (Fig. 10) 59
Porphyrin 64
Positive ionotropic drugs 113-43
Potassium salts 157
Potassium-losing drugs 430
Potassium supplements 55, 113, 221, 461
Povidone 52
Practolol 57, 367
Pravastatin 210, 211, 214, 462
Prazosin 58, 63, 168, 169, 238
Prednisolone 6, 16, 55, 61, 119, 275, 429, 432,
456, 459, 462, 478, 544, 559
Prednylidene 429
Premarin 435
Prempack C 435
Prenylamine 119, 133
Prescriptions, UK, top 50 ingredients, rank
order, patients exposed 6
Prilocaine 61, 518
Primaquine 61, 63, 70
Primazide 139
Primidone 26, 61, 131, 139159, 252, 365, 441,
443, 444, 460
Prinzmetals angina 242, 243
Pro Urokinase 182
Probenecid 31, 34, 61, 157, 224, 228, 377, 384,
386, 388, 397, 401, 413, 477, 488, 501
Probucol 119, 210, 213
Procainamide 31, 34, 91, 102, 114, 115, 117, 119,
128, 130, 134-5, 141, 157, 162, 392
interactions 134-6
Procaine 61, 135, 389, 517, 519, 520, 522
penicillin 57, 384
Procarbazine 470, 480, 564
Prochlorperazine 6
Procyclidine 365
Progabide 40
Progesterone 442
Progestogens 62, 423, 439
Proguanil 191, 192
Prolactin 103
secretion stimulators (list) 448, 449
Promazine 275
Promethazine 49, 61, 70, 266-8, 274, 275, 368,
558
Propafenazone 249
Propafenone 115, 118, 120, 136, 137, 179, 460
interactions 136
Propane 238
Propanidid 61, 62
Propantheline 61, 127
Propellants 237, 238
Propicillin 57
Propofol 70, 557
Propoxyphene 61
Propranolol 6, 16, 39, 55, 57, 58, 61, 63, 86, 88,
132, 137, 141, 147-52, 168, 179, 212, 238,
253, 367, 419, 478, 482. 519, 520, 544. 577
isomers 19

INDEX

Propylene glycol 52
Propylthiouracil 192
Prostacyclin 180
Prostaglandin analogues 93
Prostaglandin synthase 25
Prostaglandins 41, 493
Prostigmine 61
Protamine sulphate 181, 204, 205
Protein C 446
Proton pump inhibitors 85-7, 95, 381
Protriptyline 57, 162, 241
Pseudocholinesterases 520, 526, 531. 532
plasma, abnormal 64
Pseudoephedrine 6, 35
Psilocybe semilanceatal 545
Psoriatic arthritis 456
Psychotropics 64, 66, 119, 545
Pulmonary fibrosis 468
Putrescine 25
PVC infusion bags 554, 555
Pyrazinamide 62, 397
Pyrazolones 62, 204
Pyridostigmine 137, 374, 379, 528
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) 52, 60, 62, 275, 367
Pyrimethamine 62, 393, 574

QT interval, drugs prolonging 118, 119
Quercetin 273, 576
Quinacrine 70
Quinapril 153
Quinethazone 217
Quinidine 27, 34, 40, 42, 57, 58, 63, 65, 86, 957, 102, 114, 115, 117, 119-22, 125, 128,
130, 136-41, 159, 162, 192, 221, 229, 429,
482, 528, 530, 542, 545
interactions 137-141
Quinine 6, 34, 62, 65, 70, 119, 124, 129, 200,
395, 533, 534, 557
Quinocide 63
Quinolones and fluroquinolones 26, 34, 40, 250,
251, 384, (list) 387; 387, 388, 495, 575
Quinolones, epileptogenic potential 501

Rabies vaccine 509
Radio cantrast media 275
Radiomimetics 468
Ramipril 153, 155, 560
Ranitidine 6, 34, 62, 87, 88, 91, 102, 193, 257.
387, 413, 460, 461, 520, 531, 587
Rauwolfia serpentina 66
Razoxane 455, 470
Renal drug transport, molecular mechanisms 29
Reproterol 235, 241-3, 256, 432
Rescinnamide alkaloids 66
Reserpine 62, 65, 66, 162, 366, 449
Resorcinol 62, 70

627

Respiratory disease, agents used,
interactions 235-45
Retinoids 392
Reyes syndrome 487
Rheumatoid arthritis 455
Riblflavine 70, 400, 473, 540
Rifabutin 393, 441
Rifampicin 26, 51, 62. 70, 96, 98, 106, 123, 124,
130, 131. 136. 138, 142, 143. 149, 150,
159, 179, 192, 251, 379, 381, 393-5, 398,
399, 411, 429, 431, 432, 441, 443, 457,
460, 544, 559, 566, 575
Rimactane 192
Rimiterol 235. 241-3, 256, 432
Risperidone 593
Ritodrine 236, 241-3, 256, 424, 432
Rooibos tea (Aspalathus linearis) 545
Rose Bengal 51
Roxithromycin 575
Rubber 549, 551, 556, 557
Rufloxacin 575

Salazosulphapyridine 63
Salbutamol (albuterol) 6. 119, 227, 235, 241-4,
256, 432
Salicylates 16, 31, 41, 183, 184, 204, 413, 489,
495, 498
Salmeterol 235, 241, 242, 244, 256, 432
Santonin 70
Saruplase (Pro Urokinase) 182
Satropine 40
Scatchard plot 18
Scopalia carniolica 66
Scopolamine 66
Sedatives 169, 267, 269, 564
SeeQuence lenses 559
Selective serotonin uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) 40
Selegiline 12, 26, 363, 367-9
Senna 70
Sennosides 65
Sensory disturbances 63
Serotonin 40
antagonists 119
Shankapusph syrup 545
Silastic catheters 553
Silicones 200, 549
catheters 551
rubber 51
Siliconized glassware 49
Simvastatin 210, 211, 214, 462
Skeletal muscle relaxants 136, 141, 152, 228, 374,
375, 379, 386, 398, 456, 472, 473
interactions 525-35
Smoking 133, 253, 255. 423, 521
Sodium bicarbonate 98, 522
Sodium bisulphite 479
Sodium carboxy methylcellulose 52
Sodium clodronate 435

628

INDEX

Sodium fluoride 435
Sodium fusidate 379, 575
Sodium metabisulphite 52
Sodium nitroprusside 172, 180
Sodium salicylate 184
Sodium salts 35
Sodium valproate 460, 491
(see also valproic acid) 62, 460, 491, 566, 590
Solvents 27
Somatostatin 41
Sorption 46, 47. 49
interactions 50
number 49
drug loss to plastics (Fig.9) 50
Sotalol 11, 102, 115, 129, 130. 135, 147, 151,
152, 238, 271
Sparteine 27, 545
Spiramycin 382, 383
Spironolactone 57, 62, 71, 96, 114, 126, 195,
218, 219, 225-7, 471, 491, 577
Squalene synthetase inhibitors 211
SSRIs (see serotonin re-uptake inhibitors)
Stanozolol 183
Steroids 27
Stevens-Johnson syndrome 157, 388, 590
Streptase 182
Streptokinase 181, 182, 204, 205
Streptomycin 62, 189, 373, 375, 393. 395, 528
Strophanthus species 66
Styrene-acrylo-nitrile copolymer 47, 551, 556
Succinimides 62
Succinylcholine 62
Sucralfate 94, 95, 127, 141, 179, 381, 387, 390
Sulbenicillin 57
Sulconazole 380
Sulfafurazole 275
(sulphasomidine) 57
Sulfametopyrazine 389
Sulindac 35, 186, 493, 497, 503
Sulphacetamide 63
Sulphadiazine 16, 389, 522, 544
Sulphadimidine 275. 389
Sulphafurazole 275
Sulphamethoxazole 389, 415
Sulphamethoxypyridazine 63
Sulphanilamide 63
Sulphaphenazole 449
Sulphapyridine 63, 105
Sulphasalazine 105. 106, 127
Sulphasalazine (salazopyrine) 51, 70, 457
Sulphlnpyrazone 34, 179, 200, 201, 228, 259,
413, 423. 460. 477, 488, 491
Sulphisoxazole 16
Sulphonal 62
Sulphonamide-trimethoprim combinations 460
Sulphonamides 62, 63, 70, 135, 187, 189, (list)
388; 388-90, 413, 457, 477, 509, 519, 575
/co-trimoxazole 461

Sulphonylureas (see also antidiabetics) 62, 69,
163, 191. 204, 212, 219, 220, 392, 393,
411, 413. 487
Sulphonylureas. interactions 411, 413
Sulpiride 365, 369, 370
Sulthiame 62
Sustained-release formulations 578
Suxamethonium 91, 126170, 315, 456, 457, 472,
521, 522, 528-32
dual block 530
Sympathetic amines, interactions 235, 236
Sympathomimetic amines 119, 127, 152, 168,
170, 256
cardiotropic use 236
nasal decongestants 236
ophthalmic preparations 237
used in obesity 237, 240, 241
uterine relaxants 236
Syringes, mixing drugs 44
Systemic lupus erythematosus 455

Tacrolimus 455, 462, 463
drugs inhibiting metabolism (list) 463
Tamoxifen 26, 201, 463, 470, 481, 482
Tanitidine 88
Taxol 550, 551
Taxotere 50
Taxoterene 550, 551
Teclothiazide 217
Teflon 549
Teicoplanin 373, 379, 380
Temafloxacin 539
Temazepam 6, 58, 271, 449
Temocillin 384
Tenidap 503
Teniposide 550
Tenoxicam 490, 493
Terazosin 168, 169, 238
Terbinafine 397, 586, 587
Terbutaline 6, 119, 235, 242, 244, 256, 257, 432
Terfenadine 102, 119, 129, 131, 137, 139, 151,
265, 266, 268, 272, 273, 381, 382, 542,
577, 588, 591, 592
Terodiline 119
Tetanus vaccine 6
Tetrabenzine 365, 369
Tetraconazole 96
Tetracycline 189
Tetracyclines 12, 55, 57, 62, 94, 96, 98, 122-4,
212, 251. 275, 383, (list) 390; 390, 392,
441. 443, 416, 411, 528, 538, 544, 528,
538, 544, 575, 591
Tetraethylammonium bromide 62
Tetrahydrazoline 236
Teucrium chamaedrysl 546
Theophylline 16, 26, 34, 35, 42, 56, 58, 62, 86,
88, 91, 92, 128, 134, 137, 161, 198, 224.

INDEX

Theophylline (contd)
225, 248-61. 383, 388, 395, 396, 399, 449,
472, 508, 510-2, 544, 588
derivatives 247
interactions 247-64
hydrate 247
modified release 248
monoethanolamine 247
sodium glycinate 247
Theosulfan 468
Thiabendazole 248, 249
Thiamphenicol 377
Thiazide diuretics (see also diuretics, thiazides)
35, 219, 220, 221
Thiazolsulfone 63, 71
Thiethylperazine 275
Thioguanine 470, 472, 478
Thiomersal sodium 52
Thiopentone (thiopental) 25, 47, 49, 389. 527,
550, 558
sodium, sorption to plastics 47
Thiopurinol 456
Thioridazine 49, 58, 63, 102, 275, 481, 558
Thiotepa 455, 468, 473, 531
Thiothixene 481
Thiouracils 62, 192
Thioxanthenes 367-70, 482
Thrombolytics 593
Thymoxamine 234
Thyroid 229
function tests 495, 496
hormones 201, 202, 212, 214, 395, 411, 413,
424, 495
Thyroxine 55, 95, 151, 152, 212, 214, 395
-1iothyronine preparation 201
Tiaprofenic acid 493, 503
Ticarcillin 375: 385
Ticlopidine 577, 593
Tienilic acid (withdrawn) 219
Tilia tea 546
Tiludronate 98, 435, 574
Timolol 147
eye drops 141
Tinidazole 380
Tixocortol 429
Tobacco smoke 27
Tobacco smoking (see also smoking) 26
Tobramycin 58, 373-5, 502, 528
Tocainide 115, 118, 249
Tolazamide 62, 411
Tolazoline 502
Tolbutamide 27, 55, 58, 62, 163, 187, 191, 212,
377, 389, 411, 413-7, 421, 423, 489, 564,
567
Tolfenamic acid 16
Toliprolol 147
Tolmetin 494, 503
Tolonium 71
Toluidine blue 63

629

Topiramate 441
Torasemide 218
Torsade de pointes 40, 101, 102, 118, 119, 12831, 133, 135, 137, 139, 151. 272. 318-83,
591
TPN fluids 44. 45
Traditional medical practices 537
Tramadol 577
Trandolapril 153
Tranquillizers 169
Transmission systems. cholinergic synapse 39
Transmission systems, dopaminergic synapse 39
Transmission systems, GABAergic synapse 39
Transmission systems, homeostatic regulations 39
Transmission systems, hormonal 39
Transmission systems, ion channels (Ca, K,
ATP-sensitive) 39
Transmission systems, noradrenergic synapse 39
Transplant, rejection, prevention 455
Tranylcypromine 12, 62
Traxenamic acid 205
Tremor, drugs used to control (list) 365
Tretamine 531
Triacetyloleandomycin 26, 382, 383
Triamcinolone 429
Triamterene 34. 71, 114, 218-20, 228, 229, 497
Triazole compounds 397
Tribavirin 400
Trichlormethiazide 217
Trichloroethane 238
Trichlorofluoromethane (propellant 11) 238
Trichlorotrifluoromethane (propellant 113) 238
Triconazole 380
Trifluoperazine 49, 62, 482, 558
Trimeprazine 267, 268, 368
Trimetaphan 170
Trimethadione 61
Trimethoprim 6, 34, 124, 135, 187, 192, 221, 389,
392, 393, 401, 461
Trimolets 496
Trinitrotoluene 63
Trional 62
Tripamide 217
Triparanol 449
Tripelennamine 62, 274, 275
Tripotassium dicitrato bismuthate 93
Triprolidine 267
Troleanomycin 251, 252, 272, 463
Trometamol 44
Tropane alkaloids 66
Troxidone 62
Tubocurarine 62, 65, 141, 161, 224. 374, 375,
379, 386, 456, 457, 526-30
Tulobuterol 235, 242, 244, 432
Tween 20 50
Tween 80 50
Typhoid vaccine 6
injection 508
oral 508, 509

630

INDEX

Tyramine 11, 25, 40, 573, 577, 578
containing foods (list) 490
foods, high content 162, 163, 364, 395
Tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitors 169
interactions 169

Ulcerative colitis 105, 455
Ultraviolet ray absorbers, in plastics 550
Uramustine 468
Urea 218
Urginea maritima 66
Uricosuric agents 228, 259, 384, 488-91
Urinary alkalinizers 34
Urinary incontinence, therapy 119
Urine retention, elderly 238
Urine, drugs which may discolour (Table 19) 70,
71
Urokinase 182
Uterine relaxants 236

Vaccination, smallpox 474
Vaccine, Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) 253,
507
Vaccine, cholera 508
Vaccine, diphtheria 508
Vaccine, Haemophilus influenza type b 508
Vaccine, Hepatitis B 457, 509
Vaccine, influenza 510-2
Vaccine, measles 508
Vaccine, meningococcal 508
Vaccine, mumps 508
Vaccine, poliomyelitis 508
Vaccine, rabies 509
Vaccine, rubella 508
Vaccine, tetanus 508
Vaccine, typhoid 508
Vaccine, yellow fever 508
Vaccines, killed 462
Vaccines, live 407, 509
Vaccines, to HIV positive subjects 508
Vaccines, interactions 507-14
Valproic acid (see also sodium valproate) 17, 62,
488
VAMP 471
Vancomycin 373, 374, 379, 380, 395, 461
Vanoxerine 577
Vasodilators 119, 162, 170, 171
Vecuronium 456, 457, 462, 527, 528
Venous thromboembolism 440
Verapamil 17, 34, 35, 40, 115, 116, 125, 126,
130, 139, 141-3, 148, 157-161, 254, 269,
394, 420, 459, 463, 482, 528, 564
interactions 141-3

Verapamil (contd)
isomers 19
Vidarabine 478
Vigabatrin 40
Viloxazine 82, 252
Vinblastine 400, 401, 469, 481
Vinca alkaloids 65, 469
interactions 474, 475
Vincristine 400, 401, 469, 481
Vindesine 469
Vinpocetine 577
Vinyl chloride 238
Viomycin 375
Vitamins 65
A acetate 550, 557, 558
sorption to plastics 47
A palmitate 557, 558
and mineral supplements 436, 437, 574, 575
B12 448
C 62
D 126
deficiency-like states 63
K 187, 188, 198, 202, 375, 389, 391, 395
high content foods 179
dietary 212
fat soluble, A, D, E and K 212
Volume control chamber, cellulose
propionate 554

Warfarin 6, 17, 27, 42, 47, 49, 55, 56, 58, 71, 88,
89, 95, 101, 114, 128, 129, 177, 178, 183,
184, 186, 187, 191, 192, 198-201, 212-4,
219, 227, 260, 375-7, 382, 387, 389, 392,
393, 398, 399, 416, 429, 430, 458, 460,
472, 477, 502, 503, 511, 512, 541, 550,
559, 564-6, 576, 588, 592
interactions (Table 1) 179
( R and S isomers) 22, 184, 188, 193, 195, 200,
502
sodium, sorption to plastics 47
Wasp sting 157

Xanthine oxidase 25
Xipamide 217
Xsymalobium undulatus 66
Xylocaine 62
Xylometazoline 236
Xylose 477

Zalospirone 577
Zidovudine 34, 383, 400, 401, 575, 576
Zomepirac 17
Zyloric 203

INDEX

631

Index B: Incornpatabilities and Interactions

Incompatibilities (in vitro)
Acyclovir/amphotericin 398
Agents containing sulphydryl
groupslbleomycin 473
Amino acidsbleomycin 473
lfluorouracil 476
Aminophylline/bleomycin 473
ldimenhydrinate 274
/doxorubicin 474
Ihydroxyzine hydrochloride 275
/procaine 522
/promethazine 275
Amiodarone/calcium channel blockers 130
Ammonium chloride/dimenhydrinate 274
Amphotericin/diphenhydramine 275
Ilignocaine hydrochloride 522
/procaine 522
Ampicillin sodiudlignocaine hydrochloride 522
Ascorbic acidlbleomycin 473
Aspirin/chlorpropamide 489
/tolbutamide 489
Azathioprine/frusemide 457
Barbiturates, soluble/diphenhydramine 275
/hydroxyzine hydrochloride 275
ldimenhydrinates 275
Barbituratedprocaine 522
Ipromethazine 275
Benzylpenicillin salts/promethazine 275
Benzylpenicillin/cyclizine lactate 274
Ihydroxyzine hydrochloride 275
Benzylpenicillin salts/promethazine 275
Bleomycin/dexamethasone 473
/frusemide 473
/riboflavine 473
Ca, K, Mg and Na salts/procaine 522
Calcium chloride/chlorpheniramine maleate 274
Calcium gluconatelindomethacin sodium
injection 502
Carbenicillin sodiumlpromethazine 275
Cefoperazone sodiudpromethazine 275
Cephalothin sodium/diphenhydramine 275
/doxorubicin 474
/lignocaine, incompatibility 522
Chloramphenicol sodium succinate/hydroxyzine
hydrochloride 275
/tripelemamhe 275
Chlorothiazide sodium/promethazine 275
Chlorpheniramine maleateliodipamide
meglumine 274
Ikanamycin sulphate 274
/noradrenaline acid tartrate 274
/pentobarbitone sodium 274

Chlortetracycline hydrochloride/cyclizine
lactate 274
Chlotramphenicol/dimenhydrinate 274
Choramphenicol sodium
succinate/promethazine 275
Cimetidinelindomethacin sodium injection 502
Cisplatin/sodium bisulphite 479
Coffee, tea, fruit juices/phenothiazines 290, 291
Contrast medialdiphenhydramine 275
Cyclizine lactatehorphine sulphate 271, 274
/oxytetracycline hydrochloride 274
/solutions of pH 6.8 or more 274
Cytarabine/fluorouracil 475, 476
hethotrexate 475, 478
Daunorubicidheparin 474
Dexamethasone/doxorubicin 474
Dextran/promethazine 275
Diazepam/fluorouracil 476
Dimenhydrinate/hydroxyzine hydrochloride 275
lglycopyrronium bromide 274
/heprin 274
/hydrocortisone sodium succinate 274
ihydroxyzine hydrochloride 274
hodipamide 274
/meglumhe 275
hethoxmine 275
/nicotinic acid 275
/phenothiazines 275
/phenytoin 275
/prednisolone 275
/promazine hydrochloride 275
/promethazine hydrochloride 275
/pyridoxine hydrochloride 275
/radio contrast media 275
/tetracycline 275
Diodone/promethazine 275
Diphenhydramine/hydrocortisone sodium
succinate 275
/solutions of alkalis or strong acids 275
Dobutamine/indomethacin sodium injection 502
Dopaminelindomethacin sodium injection 502
Doxorubicinlfluorouracil 474, 476
/heparin sodium solution 474
/hydrocortisone 474
Ethamivan/promethazine 275
Fluorouracil/insulin 476
lmethotrexate 475, 476, 478
/multivitamins 476
/penicillins 476
/tetracycline 476
Frusemide/promethazine 275

632

INDEX

Gentamicin sulphate/indomethacin sodium
injection 502
Glucose/indomethacin sodium injection 502
Heparin sodiumlpromethazine 275
Hydrocortisone sodium
succinate/promethazine) 275
Hydroxyzine hydrochloride/thioridazine 275
Indomethacin sodium injectiodtobramycin
sulphate 502
Indomethacin sodium injection/tolazoline 502
Lignocaine hydrochloride/methohexitone
sodium 522
/phenytoin sodium 522
/sulphadiazine sodium 522
Magnesium sulphate/procaine 522
Methicillin sodium/promethazine 275
Methotrexate/prednisolone sodium
phosphate 478
Morphine sulphate/promethazine (in v i m ) 275
Nalbuphine hydrochloride/promethazine 275
lthiethylperazine 275
Nitrofurantoin/promethazine 275
Phenobarbitone sodium/tripelennamine 275
Phenytoin sodiumlprocaine 522
/tripemelamine 275
Phenytoin/promethazine 275
Prednisolone/promethazine 275
Procaine/sodium bicarbonate 522
Promethazine/some contrast media 275
/sulphadimidine 275
/sulphafurazole 275

Interactions (in vivo)
acarbose/antidiabetic agent 414
/cholestyramine 212, 414
/neomycin 414
ACE inhibitorlalcohol 155
/allopurinol 155
/amiloride 221
/antidiabetic agent 418
/antipsychotic 155
/aspirin 488
baclofen 155, 533
/bee or wasp venom 157
beta-blocker 155

ACE inhibitor (contd)
/calcium channel blocker 155
/carbenoxolone 155
ichlorpromazine 155
/frusemide 223
/high/flux dialysis membranes 156
/hydralazine 172
/insulin 418
/NSAID 495
/oral contraceptive 447
/potassium salts 157
ACE inhibitordtriamterene 228
AcenocoumaroVflurbiprofen 184, 185
Acetazolamide/amiodarone 130
icarbenoxolone 96
/corticosteroid 431
/digoxin 126
/lignocaine 521
/lithium 220, 221, 222, 328
/quinidine 140, 221
Acetylcholine (ophthalmic)/NSAIDs
(ophthalmic) 497
Acetylsalicylic acid/flufenamic acid 21
/phenylbutazone 21
Acipimodalcohol 213
/cholestyramine 213
Acyclovir/probenecid 34
Adenosine/dipyridamole 127
/theophylline 128
ADH secretion/amitriptyline
lantipsychotic agent 292, 293
karbamazepine 481
/chlorpropamide 481
klofibrate 481
kyclophosphamide 481
/diuretics 481
/fluphenazine 481
/haloperidol 481
hhioridazine 481
hhiothixene 481
lvinblastine 481
hincristine 481
Adrenaline and noadrenalhebeta-blocker 152
Adrenaline or noradrenaline in local
anaesthetidantidepressant, MA01 298
Adrenaline or noradrenaline/antidepressant,
tricyclic 307
Adrenaline/MAOI 288
/volatile anaesthetics 238
Adrenergic blocking agentshpenthixol 316
Alcohol and other CNS
depressanthetirosine 169
AlcohoYalphal-blocker 567
/amitriptyline 307, 308
/anticoagulant, coumarins 182, 565, 566
/anticonvulsant 566
/antidepressants, SSRIs 566, 567
/antidepressants, tricyclic 307, 308, 566
/antidiabetic agent 414, 567

INDEX

Alcohol (contd)
/antihypertensive, ACE inhibitor 567, 568
/antihypertensive, beta-blocker 567
/antihypertensive, nitrates 567, 568
lantipsychotic agent 285
/aspirin 488, 565
haclofen 533
hromocriptine 568
/cefoperazone 376
/cephalosporins 376
kephamandole 376, 568, 569
/chlormethiazole 568
/chlorpropamide 414, 567
Icimetidine 568
/CNS depressants 569
/cycloserine 396
/dextropropoxyphene 565
ldisulfiram 569, 570
lgriseofulvin 399
hydralazine 171
link cap fungus (Coprinus atramentarius) 539
/ketoconazole 380
llatamoxef 376
/magic mushroom (Psilocybe semilanceatal) 545
lmetformin 414, 567
/metronidazole 380, 569
/oral contraceptive 449
/paracetam01 565
Iphenobarbitone 349
lphenytoin 342
lprocainamide 134
/procarbazine 480
Itolbutamide 414, 567
/warfarin 179, 182, 565, 566
Alcoholic drinkslantidepressant, MA01 298, 566
Alcuroniudbeta-blocker 530
/drugs with local anaesthetic properties
(list) 530
lpenicillamine 530
lphenytoin 530
lquinidine 530
Aldesleukinlhydralazine 171
Aldosteronelcaptopril 156
AlfentaniUerythromycin 382
Alkaline solutions/azathioprine 456, 475
Allopurinollamoxycillin 385
/ampicillin 385
/anticoagulant (coumarin) 202
Iazathioprine 456, 475
hishydroxycoumarin 183
lcaptopril 155
/cyclophosphamide 472
/fluorouracil 476
/mercaptopurine 476
lpentostatin 479
/tamoxifen 481
Itheophylline 259
lvidarabine 478
/warfarin 182, 183

633

Alpha/adrenergic blocking agentlclonidine 166
ladrenergic blocking agenthndoramine 234
/adrenergic blocking agent/sympathomimetic
bronchodilators 234
Iadrenergic blocking agents/thymoxamine 234
Alprazolam/oral contracepotive 449
Alteplaselbeta-blocker 203
/calcium antagonists 203
iepoprostenol 203
/heparin or coumarins 203
hifedipine 203
/nitrates 203
Aluminium hub, syringe needle/doxorubicin 474
Aluminium hydroxide gel/diflunisal 495
Aluminium hydroxide/phenothiazine 285
Amantadine/methyldopa 369
imetoclopramide 369
/phenothiazines 369
iquininelquinidine 33, 34
ketrabenazine 369
ltriamterene with hydrochlorothiazide 228
Amethocaine/sulphonamide 519
Amiloridelcarbenoxolone 96
/digoxin 222
/K-sparing drugs or K supplements 221
/quinidine 137
Aminoglycoside antibiotic/vancomycin 395
lethacrynic acid 222
/frusemide 222, 223
lprocainamide 135
Aminoglycoside/bisphosphonates 374, 437
/capreomycin 395
/cisplatin 374, 478
/diuretics, loop 374
/foscarnet 400
/frusemide 55
/heparin 374
heostigmine 374
/pyridostigmine 374
ltubocurarine 374, 375
/vitamin K production 375
/warfarin 375
Aminophyllinicimetidine 92
Aminophylline and theophylline/lithium 322
Aminophylline/cimetidine 42
khiabendazole 249
Amiodarone/antiarrhythmics 128
/antidepressants (tri- and tetracyclics) 129
/aprindine 129
/astemizole 129
/beta-blockers 129, 148
/chloroquine 129
kimetidine 130
lcisapride 102
/digoxin 120, 121, 129, 130
/diltiazem 130, 159
/disopyramide 128, 130
/diuretics (loop and thiazides) 130
iflecainide 128

634

INDEX

Amiodarone (conrd)
/halofantrine 129
hefloquine 129
lmethotrexate 477
/nicoumalone 128
/phenothiazines 129
/phenytoin 129
Iprocainamide 32. 128, 135
lprocainamide-n-acetylprocainamide 34
P V C infusion bags 552
lquinidine 128, 137
/quinine 129
/sotalol 129
lterfenadine 129
/theophylline 249
herapamil 130, 159
/warfarin 128, 129, 183
Amitriptyline with chlorpromazine/prazosin 169
Amitriptyline/anticoagulant, coumarin 191
/co-careldopa with metoclopramide 365, 366
ldebrisoquine 162
lguanethidine 163
flevodopa 310
flithium 325
Amodiaquine hydrochloride/plastic membrane
filter 553
Amphetamines and other
sympathomimeticshnethyldopa 168
Amphetamines/guanethidine 164, 165
Amphotericin Bldigoxin 124
non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker 527
Amphotericin/digitalis glycosides 398
/flucytosine 398
/miconazole 398
/minocycline 398
/norfloxacin 398
Irifampicin 398
/skeletal muscle relaxants 398
Ampicillin/chloroquine 385
/oral contraceptives 386, 442, 443
/sulphasalazine 106
Amylobarbitone/yohimbine (from Puusinysruliu
yohimbine) 546
Anabolic steroidanticoagulant (coumarin) 183
/insulin 415
ltolbutamide 415
Anaesthetic agentbeta-blocker 149
/vancomycin 379, 380
Anaesthetic agents (list), non-depolarizing
neuromuscular 527
Anaestheticlhydralazine 172
Anaesthetics, general/verapamil 159
Anaesthetics, volatile/isoprenaline 238
Ancrod/dextrins 203
Ancrod/plasma expanders 203
Anion exchange resinshitamins, dietary 212
Antacid (Al)/ethambutol 397
Antacidantibacterials 98
/anticoagulant (coumarin) 186, 187

Antacid (contd)
/antihypertensive, ACE inhibitor 97
/aspirin 97
/azithromycin 98, 382
lbisphosphonate 98
/cefpodoxime 98
/chlorpromazine 98
lchlortetracycline 98
lcimetidine 55
/ciprofloxacin 98
/digoxin 55, 120
/disodium etidronate 98
/disodium pamidronate 98
lethambutol 98
lfosinopril 97
hmidazoles 380
/iron 55
hsoniazid 98
/itraconazole 98
/ketoconazole 98
/nitrofurantoin 98, 364
/norfloxacin 98
/oxafloxacin 98
/penicillamine 98
/pivampicillin 98, 385
/procainamide 134
lquinidine 97, 138
hfampicin 98
/sodium clodronate 98
/tetracyclines 55, 98, 390
ltheophylline 257
ltiludronate 98
lvalproic acid 354
Antacids (Al, Bi, Ca, Mg cations)/
4-quinolones 387
Antacids and absorbants/isoniazid 396
Antiarrhythmic agent/antidepressant, SSRI 313
/beta-blocker 148
/lignocaine 132
lquinidine 138
lterfenadine 270, 271
/theophylline 249
Antiarrhythmics/cisapride 102
/disopyramide 130
lmexiletine 133
Antiasthma medication/Betel nut chewing 538,
539
Antibacterialslmexiletine 133
lsucralfate 94
Antibiotics (list), non-depolarizing muscle
relaxants 528
Antibioticsloral typhoid vaccine 509
/warfarin 179
Anticholinergic drugs/antidepressant,
tricyclic 308
/quinidine 138
Anticoagulant, antidiabetic, sulphonylurea 416,
417

INDEX

Anticoagulant, coumarin and
indanediones/quinidine salts 192
Anticoagulant, coumarin/anticonvulsant 189
/antidepressant (MAOI) 190
/antidepressant (tricyclic) 191
/antimicrobial agent 187
/aspirin and other salicylates 183, 184
/aspirin 488
barbiturate 195, 196
karbamazepine 189, 190
/chloral hydrate and related compounds 197
lchloramphenicol 377
/chlorpromazine 285
/chlorpropamide 191
[clofibrate 194
/corticosteroids 194
/desipramine 191
/dibenzepin 191
/diuretics plus spironolactone 195
lethclorvynol 197
/felbamate 189, 190
Iglibenclamide 191
Iglutethimide 197
/griseofulvin 188
/heparin 204
hmipramine 191
hdomethacin 185
hproniazid 190
/isocarboxazid 190
Ikanamycin 188
/ketoprofen 185
/latamoxef sodium 188
/liquid paraffin 198, 199
lmebanazine 190
/mefenamic acid 185
/meth ylthiouracil 192
lnaproxen 185
Ineomycin sulphate 189
Inialamide 190
/NSAID 183
/oral contraceptive 199
/oxyphenbutazone 186
/paracetam01 185, 186
/phenelzine 190
/phenobarbitone 189
/phenoxypropazine 190
/phenylbutzone 186
/phenytoin 189, 190
/propylthiouracil 192
/quinine 200
/quinolones 387
/streptokinase 204, 205
/streptomycin sulphate 189
/sucralfate 94
/sulphonamide 189
/tetracycline 189
/thiouracil 192
/thyroid hormone 201, 202
holbutamide 191

635

Anticoagulantidiazoxide 171
/diuretic 219
/maxepa 214
/miconazole gel 592
/oral contraceptive 444-446
/penicillin. broad spectrum 385
/tetracycline 391
Anticoagulants/garlic (Allium sativum) 540, 541
/meloxicam 593
/quinidine 138
Anticonvulsant/antidepressant, SSRI 312, 313
Icisapride 101
/reserpine 357
/vinca alkaloid 474
/mexilethe 133
Antidepressant/H2-receptor antagonist 310
/local anaesthetics with adrenaline or
noradrenaline 518
Antidepressant, MA01 (nonselective)/selegilline 368
Antidepressant, MA01 and otherdlithium 324
Antidepressant, MA01 and
tricyclic/methyldopa 166
Antidepressant, MAOUantidepressant,
SSRI 302, 313
/antidepressant, tricyclic 302, 303, 308
{antidiabetic, sulphonylurea 417
/antimuscarink agent 370
lantiparkinsonian drugs 300
lappetite suppressant 298, 299
barbiturate hypnotic 299
beta-blocker 150
bethanidine 163
biguanide antidiabetics 300
/caffeine (or other xanthines) 299, 300
karbamazeepine 351
/clozapine 288
lcoumarin anticoagulant 298
/dopamine 238, 239
/dopexamine 239
/fluoxetine 302, 313, 316
lfluvoxamine 316
/foodstuffs and beverages rich in tyramine 303,
304
/glymidine 300
Iguanethidine 163, 298
/hydralazine 172
/insulin 300, 417
/insulin and oral hypoglycaemics 300
Aevodopa 300, 301
/methyldopa 298
Inoradrenaline 239
/oxypertine 288
/pancuronium 528
/paroxetine 302, 313, 316
/phenothiazine 288
/phenylephrine 240
/phenylpropanolamine 239, 240, 298, 299
isertraline 302, 313, 316

636

INDEX

Antidepressant, MA01 (contd)
/sulphonylurea antidiabetics 300
/sympathomimetic amines 301
/sympathomimetic nasal congestant 241
/tryptophan 303
/tyramine 11, 573
Antidepressant, SSRUcarbamazepine 351
/lithium 314
lmephentoin 348
lsumatriptan 314
/theophylline 252
hinblastine 315
Antidepressant, tri- and
tetracyclicsldisopyramide 131
/quinidine 139
Antidepressant, tricycliclantiepileptic agents 310
/antihistamine 308, 309
/antimuscarinic agent 370
Iantipsychotics (neuroleptics) 286-8, 311
/astemizole 309
/barbiturates 309
ibenztropine 289
beta-blocker 151
hethanidine 309
buranilicaine containing noradrenaline 518
/calcium channel blocker 310
kimetidine 42
lfluoxetine 308, 313
/flupenthixol 315
lguanethiine 163, 164, 309
/halofantrine 310
/high fibre diet 450
/hydralazine 172
/lithium 324, 325
/MA01 241
imethdilazine 309
Inoradrenaline 241
lorphenadrine 311
/phenobarbitone 349
/phenothiazine 286
/probucol 213
/procarbazine 480
lpromethazine 309
hifampicin 393
lsympathomimetic amines 311
/terfenadine 271, 309
Itrimeprazine 309
Antidepressant/sympathomimeticamines 238,
239-241
Antidiabetic agent, sulphonylureal
4-quinolones 388
/azapropazone 421, 495
/chlorthalidone 422
/dofibrate 421, 422
/diuretic, thiazide 219, 220, 422
iethacrynic acid 219, 220
/fenclofenac 421
/flucytosine 398
/guanethidine 163

Antidiabetic agent, sulphonylurea (contd)
hndobufen 421
hsoniazid 415, 416
lphenothiazine 288
/phenylbutazone 421, 495
/rifmpicin 393
lsalicylates 495
Itriamterene 219, 220
Itrimethoprim 392
Antidiabetic agentlcorticosteroid 430
/dicoumarol 416
/diuretic 219, 220
/guanethidine 163
/meloxicam 593
/propranolol 150, 151
/thyroid hormone 424
/warfarin 416
Antiepileptic agentkalcium channel blocker 159,
160
/corticosteroid 430
hheophylline 252
Antiepileptic therapy/frusemide 223
/oral contraceptive 443, 444
Antifungals/cyclosporin 586
Antihistamine (Hl)/adrenaline or
noradrenaline 269
/anticholinesterase 267, 268
lCNS depressant 269
/drugs in solution 274
Antihistaminebeta-blocker 151
/procainamide 135
/propafenone 137
Antihypertensive agent diuretics, thiazides 227
Antihypertensive agent/baclofen 534
beta-blocker 151
/calcium channel blocker 160
/carbenoxolone 96
ldiazoxide 171
/frusemide 223
imeloxicam 593
/oral contraceptive 447
Iprazosin 169
Iprocainamide 134, 135
/quinidine 139
AntimalariaYprocainamide 135
Antimuscarinic agent/disopyramide 370
Iketoconzole 370
/mexiletine 370
/sublingual nitrates 370
Antineoplastic agentlazathioprine 457
Antineoplastics (list)/suxamethonium and other
depolarizers 531
Antiparkinsonian agent/flupenthixol 315
Antipsychotic agentlapomorphine 369
lastemizole 289
Antipsychotic agentbeta-blocker 151
bromocryptine 369
kisapride 102
/disopyramide 131

INDEX

Antipsychotic agent (conrd)
/lysuride 369
/methyldopa 168
/pergolide 369
Iquinidine 139
lterfanadine 288
AntipyrinelCola nut 539
lrifampicin 150
Aprotininlsuxamethonium 529
/tubocurarine 529
Asilonelphenytoin 342
Aspirin and salicylates/chlorpropamide 420, 421
lmethotrexate 489
Itolbutarnide 420, 421
Aspiridcalcium channel blocker 489
/corticosteroid 430, 489
/Ginkgo biloba 585, 586
/griseofulvin 489
/heparin 55
lindomethacin 500
/insulin 489
llithium 329
/methotrexate 34. 477, 498
/nicotinic acid derivatives 213
/phenylbutzone 489, 490
/phenytoin 338, 339, 490
/probenecid 491
/sodium valproate 491
lspironolactone 226, 491
/streptokinase 204
lsulphinpyrazone 491
/tenoxicam 490
/valproic acid 354
/warfarin 55
Astemizolelantiarrhythmic agents 270, 271
/antidepressants, tricyclic 271
h a p r i d e 102
ldisopyramide 131
/diuretics 271
/erythromycin 270, 271
lfluvoxamine 271
lhalofantrine 271
/imidazoles 381
htraconazole 270, 271
lketoconazole 270, 271
lmacrolide antibiotics 382
/procainamide 135
/propafenone 137
/quinidine 139
/sotalol 271, 152
Atenolol/disopyramide 149
hifedipine 148
Atracuriumlazathioprine 456, 457
lcyclosporin 462
llithium 529
Azapropazonelmethotrexate 498
lphenytoin 501
Iphenytoin with primidone 339
/warfarin 22, 24, 184, 502

637

Azathioprine/captopril 156
kimetidine 457
/co-trimoxazole 456, 457
/gallamine and non-depolarizing neuromuscular
hndomethacin 457
/killed vaccines (e.g. Hepatitis B vaccine) 457
loxipurinol 456
/pancuronium 456. 457
lpenicillamine 457
hifampicin 457
lsulphasalazine (salazopyrine) 457
hlphonamides 457
lsuxamethonium 456, 457
lthiopurinol 456
ltubocurarine 456, 457
/vacines. live 509
lvecuronium 456, 457
/warfarin 458
Azlocillinicefotaxime 385
/ciprofloxacin 388
/skeletal muscle relaxants 386
/tubocurarine 386

Baclofen/hydralazine 172
/ibuprofen 534
hmipramine 309. 533
Aevodopa plus carbidopa 534
/lithium 534
/nortriptyline 309, 533
/NSAID 534
Bambuterol/theophylline 256
BanisteriopislPyschotria leaves/MAO-A 538
Barbiturate/procarbazine 480
Barbiturates/griseofulvin 399
BCG vaccineltheophylline 253, 510, 511
Benzocaineisulphonamide 519
Benzodiazepines/isoniazid 396
Mfampjcin 394
Benztropine mesylatehmipramine 287
Berberineltetracycline 538
Beta blockericardiac glycosides 125
Beta-blockericalcium channel blocker 148, 160
klonidine 166
idiltiazem 148
/ergot alkaloids 152
ilignocaine 132, 519, 520
hifedipine 148. 160
/NSAIDs 152, 495
/oestrogens (combined OCs, HRT) 152
/oral contraceptive 447
/phenothiazines 151
/prazosin 169
ipropafenone 137
hifampicin 149, 150, 394
/skeletal muscle relaxants 152
/sympathomimetic amines 152
/theophylline 253, 254

638

INDEX

Beta-blocker (conrd)
/thiazide diuretics 152
herapamil 148
herapamil 160
Beta,/sympathomimetic amines
(list)/corticosteroids 432
Betel nut (Areca catechu)/depot neuroleptics 538
Bilirubin diagnostic test/etodolac 496
Bismuth/omeprazole 94
/tetracycline 94
Bisphosphonates/calcium salts 12, 437
/food 12
Bisphosphonateshitamin and mineral
supplements 12
Bleomycin/cisplatin 473
/divalent and trivalent cations 473
Bran (high fibre meal)/digoxin 539
Bran plus psyllum biscuits/riboflavine 540
Braddietary iron 539
Bretyliuddisopyramide 130
/hypotensive agent 162
/procainamide 135
Bromfenac/phenytoin 586
Bromocriptine/butyrophenones 369, 370
Bromocriptine/erythromycin 383
/griseofulvin 399
/haloperidol 369. 370
/metoclopramide 370
/phenothiazines 369, 370
/sulpiride 369, 370
hhioxanthenes 369, 370
Brompheniramine/diatrizoate 274
hodipamide 274
hothalamate 274
Bumetanide/digoxin 126
Bumetanidehnilrinone114
Buphenine/mequitazine 268
/promethazine 268
ltrimeprazine 268
Bupivacainekimetidine 520
/ranitidine 90, 520
Busulphan/other drugs causing
gynaecomastia 471
/thioguanine 472, 478
Butacaine/sulphonamide 519
Butyrophenones/levodopa 291, 367, 368

Caffeinated drinks (tea, coffee)/flupenthixol 316
Caffeine clearance/grapefruit juice 542
Caffeine containing beverages and herbals
/4-quinolones 539
Caffeine/oral contraceptive 449
/quinolones 388
Calcium adipate and calciferotherapamil 141,
142
Calcium carbonate/diuretic, thiazide 227
Calcium carbonte/chlorothiazide 227

Calcium channel blocker/cimetidine 160
/digoxin 125, 126, 160
/grapefruit juice 160, 161. 541, 542
/hydralazine 172
/methyldopa 167
hen-depolarizing muscle relaxants 161
/phenobarbitone 349
/quinidine 139
hifampicin 159
/theophylline 254
with beta-blockerdfentanyl 160
Calcium saltskardiac glycosides 126
Capreomycinlcisplatin 395
/colistin 395
/streptomycin 395
Captopril/clonidine 156
/corticosteroids 156
lcyclophosphamide 156
/digoxin 119, 156
/diuretic 156
hndomethacin 156, 495
/levodopa 156
/lithium 157
hetolazone 225
hinoxidil 157
/NSAIDs 156
/oestrogens 157
/oral contraceptives (combined) 157
/probenecid 157
lprocainamide 157
/spironolactone 225
Carbachol (ophthalmic)/NSAIDs
(ophthalmic) 497
Carbamazepine or oxcarbarnazepineloral
contraceptive 443
Carbamazepine/cimetidine 42, 90, 353
/clarithromycin 351, 382
/corticosteroid 430
/danazol 195
ldextropropoxyphene 353
/digitoxin 124
/diltiazem 352
/doxycycline 346, 351, 391
/erythromycin 350, 382
/felbamate 356
/felodipine 159
/fluoxetine 312, 351
/fluvoxamine 313, 351
/frusemide 223
haloperidol 286
hydrochlorothiazide 223
hsoniazid 351, 396
Iisradipine 159
Aamotrigine 356
/lithium 325, 353
lmacrolide antibiotics 351
/metoclopramide 104
hicardiphe 159
/nicoumalone 351

INDEX

Carbamazepine (contd)
Inifedipine 159
Iphenytoin 342. 343
/plastic nasogastric feeding tubes 352, 552, 553
hisperidone 593
/sodium valproate 348, 355
lterfenadine 268, 352, 353
/tetracyclines 351
/theophylline 252
ltroleandomycin 351
/viloxazine 351
/warfarin 351
Carbenicillinlgentamicin 385
/gentamicin 375
Carbenoxolone/chloroquine 96
lcorticosteroid 432
/digoxin 96
Idipyridamole 96
/diuretic, loop 96
/diuretic, thiazide 96
/hydroxychloroquine 96
/iron (oral) 96
/penicillamine 96
Iphenothiazines 96
lspironolactone 55, 96
Cardiac glycoside/corticosteroid 431
Cardiac glycosides/diphenoxylate 127
/diuretic 126
/ephedrine 127
/glucose infusion 126
Ikaolinlpectin 127
/laxatives, bulk 127
/metaclopramide 127
/propantheline 127
/quinidine 139, 140
/sucralfate 127
/sulphasalazine 127
/suxamethonium 126. 127
lsympathomimetic amines 127
Cardiac-acting agentdwarfark 179
Cefpodoxine/cimetidine 377
Cefuroxime axetil/food 39
Cellulose derivatives/diethylpropion 52
filters/dactinomycin 473
Cephalosporin/colistin 376, 386
/frusemide 55, 222
/gentamkin 374
Iprobenecid 34, 377
Cephalothin/cephalexin/cimetidine32
Cephamandole/nicoumalone 376
/warfarin 376
Chickenpox infection/dactinomycin 474
Chloral hydrate/frusemide 223
Chlorambucil/phenylbutazone 472
Chloramphenicol/chlorpropamide 377, 415
lcimetidine 378
/cyclosphosphamide 378
Imethotrexate 477
/oral contraceptive 378

639

Chloramphenicol (contd)
iparacetamol 378
/penicillins 378
/phenobarbitone 349, 377
lphenytoin 377, 378
iphenytoin with phenoharhitone 339, 340
ltolhutamide 415
/tolhutamide and other sulphonylureas 377
Chlordiazepoxideflevodopa 367
/oral contraceptive 449
Chlormethiazole edisylate/plastic infusion
bags 553
edisylate/silastic catheters 553
Chloroquine/cyproheptadine 269
/digoxin 124; 125
/rabies vacine 509
/soda glass and cellulose acetate filters 47
Chloroquine sulphate or phosphate/medical
plastics 553
Chlorothiazide/cholestyramine or colestipol 227
Chlorpheniramineiphenytoin 268
Chlorpromazinelcorticosteroid 289, 431
/digoxin 290
/guanethidine 164, 289
limipramine 286
/lithium 291, 292, 327
hortriptyline 286
/phenylhutazone 55
/phenytoin 285, 286
/yohimhine (from Pausinystalia yohimbine) 546
Chlorpropamide/karela (Mamordica
charantia) 543
Chlorpropamideico-trimoxazole 415
idicoumarol and other coumarins 191, 416
/guanethidine 163
/karela 422
/sulphonamide 389
/warfarin 416
Chlorthalidone/digoxin 126
/warfarin 219
CholestipoVgemfibrozil 213
Cholestyramine or colestipoVdigitalis
glycosides 120
/diuretic, thiazides 212
/hydrochlorothiazide 227
/nicoumalone 212
/phenindione 212
/propran0101 21
/tetracyclines 212
/thyroxine 212
/vitamins, fat soluble A, D, E, and K 212
/warfarin 212
Cholestyramine/diclofenac 496
/fatty foods 212
/warfarin 198
Cholinergic agents (list)/non-depolarizing
neuromuscular 528
/suxamethonium 528
Cholinergic drugs/procainamide 136

640

INDEX

Cholinergic drugs (contd)
/propafenone 137
/quinidine 140
Cimetidine/acetylprocainamide 32
iamiloride 32, 34
h a p r i d e 90, 102
/cyclosporin 90, 587
/desipramine 310
Idoxepine 310
Ifelodipine 160
/fluorouracil 42, 476
/gabapenth 356
/ h i p r a m h e 310
/labetalo1 151
Aignocaine (lidocaine) 42, 90, 132, 133, 520,
521
/loratidhe 272
/metformin 32, 34, 421
/metronidazole 381
/narcotic analgesics 42
/nicotine 32, 34
hortriptyline 42, 310
/perfloxacin 387
/phenytoin 42, 90, 340, 341
/pindolo1 32, 34
/procainamide 34, 91, 135, 136
/propafenone 137
/propranolol 151
lquinidine 32, 34. 42, 141
/ranitidine 32, 34
lrifampicin 394
/some benzodiazepines 42
/some beta-blockers 42
lsuxamethonium 91, 531
/tetracycline 391
/theophylline 42, 91, 92, 257, 258
Itriamterene 32, 34
/trimethoprim 34
/warfarin 42, 88, 89
/warfarin (R isomer) 192, 193
Cinafloxacin/theophylline 251
Cinnarizine/ototoxic drugs 268. 269
Cinoxacin/probenecid 388
Ciprofloxacin/liquorice derivative 96
hicoumalone 387
/phenytoin 343
/probenecid 388
Itheophylline 251, 388
/warfarin 387
Cisapride/clarithromycin 102, 383
ldisopyramide 102
/erythromycin 102, 383
/fluconazole 102, 381
halofantrine 102
htraconazole 102, 381
/ketoconazole 102, 381
/miconazole 102, 381
Ipimozide 102
/procainamide 102

Cisapride (contd)
/quinidine 102
/ranitidine 90. 102
isotalol 102
iterfenadine 102
hhioridazine 102
/warfarin 101
Cisplatin/frusemide 478
lithium 326, 327, 478, 479
Citalopram/mephentoin 348
Clarithromycin/digoxin 123
/phenytoin 382
herfenadhe 212, 592
/theophylline 249, 383
/zidoviudine 383
Class I and I1 antiarrhythmicsiprobucol 213
Clindamycinlfazidinium bromide 379
heostigmine 379
/pyridostigmine 379
/tubocurarine 379
Clofazimine/food 39, 41
ClofibratelHMG CoA reductase inhibitor 213
/phenytoin 213
/probenecid 34
Mphonylureas 212
lTeucrium chamaedrysl 546
kolbutamide 212
Clonazepam/sodium valproate 355
Clonidine/flupenthixol 316
Clonidine/desipramine 309
limipramine 165
/pericyanine 289
herapamil 142
/yohimbine (from Pausinystalia yohimbine) 546
Clozapine/lithium 292
/phenytoin 286
CNS acting drugslprocarbazine 480
/warfarin 179
Co-amiloride/trimethoprim 221
Co-trimoxazole/phenytoin 55
/tolbutamide 55
/warfarin 55
/warfarin (S isomer) 187
Cola ilex and Paullina sp./4-quinolones 539
Colaspase/insulin 479
/oral hypoglycaemic agent 479
ColestipoVdiclofenac 496
/hydrocortisone 431
Colistin/diuretic, loop 374
/fazidinium bromide 386
/skeletal muscle relaxants 386
Itubocurarine 386
Contact lens, plastic
(SeeQuence)/ciprofloxacin 559
/adrenaline or epinephryl 559
/fluorescein 559
lprednisolone 559
lrifampicin 559
Corticosteroidlcyclosporin 431

INDEX

Corticosteroid (contd)
/diuretic, loop 431
/diuretic, potassium losing 220
/diuretic, thiazide 431
/frusemide 431
/hydralazine 172
lhypotensive therapy 430
/intra/uterine contraceptive device 431
/liquorice derivative 96
/methyldopa 167
/midazolam 383
/oestrogen 431
/oral contraceptive 431, 447
/phenobarbitone 349, 430
/phenylpropanolamine 496
Iphenytoin 345, 430
Irifampicin 394, 431, 432
/selective betaz/sympathomimetic 241, 242
/warfarin 430
Coumarin yielding herbs (1ist)lgrapefruit
juice 542
Cyclizine/dihydrocodeine 271
/dipipanone 271
Aevorphanol 271
/methadone 271
lmethohexitone 271
/pethidine 271
Cyclopenthiazide/oral contraceptive 447
/insulin 472
/oral hypoglycaemic agents 472
/skeletal muscle relaxant 472
/suxamethonium 472, 531
Cyclopropane/digitalis glycosides 120
/plastics 47
Cycloserine/isoniazid 396
/phenytoin 396
Cyclosporinlmetolazone 225
Idiclofenac 496
/digoxin 461
/diltiazem 160
/diuretics, potassiumisparing 461
/erythromycin 383
Ierythropoietin 41
/fluconazole 586
/flucytosine 399
Ifluoxetine 313, 314, 461
/grapefruit juice 461, 542
lgriseofulvin 399, 586
/ketoconazole 381, 586
/killed vaccines 462
/lipid lowering agents 462
/lovastatin 214
/meloxicam 593
Inicardipine 160
hifedipine 462
/oral contraceptive 449
Iphenobarbitone 349, 350
/phenytoin 345
/plastics tipped pipette 554

641

Cyclosporin (contd)
lpravastatin 462
/prednisolone 462
hifampicin 394
himvastatin 462
/sulphonamide 389
herbinafine 586, 587
/vaccines, killed and live 509, 510
/vecuronium 462
herapamil 160
Cyproheptadine/pituitary fiunction test 269, 270
Cytarabione/methotrexate (in vivo) 475
Dactinomycin/herpes zoster infection 474
/vaccination, smallpox 474
DanazoUwarfarin 194, 195
Dantrolene (iv)/verapamil 161
Debrisoquineidesipramine 162
/fenfluramine 162
hmipramine 162
/mazindol 162
/phenylephrine 162
iprotriptyline 162
Ityraminelcontaining foodstuffs 162, 163
Depolarizing neuromuscular
blocker/quinidine 528
Desferrioxamine/phenothiazine 289
Desipramine/haloperidol 287
/ketoconazole 589, 590
/perphenazine 287
khiothixene 287
Dexamethasone suppression
test/indomethacin 496
Dexamethasone/ondansetron 430
/phenytoin 341, 345
Dextran sulphate/polyacrylonitrile dialysis
membrane 560
Dextro/amphetamine + amobarbitalltranylcypromine 299
Dextropropoxyphene/phenobarbitone 350
Dextropropoxyphene with
paracetamol/warfarin 184
Dextrothyroxinelwarfarin 201
Diazepam/isoniazid 396
/levodopa 367
/medicinal plastics 554, 555
/non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers 529
/omeprazole 86
/oral contraceptive 449
/sodium valproate 354, 355
Diazoxide/diuretics 171
/insulin 418
Dichloralphenazone/phenytoin 343
Diclofenac/dinoprostone (prostaglandin E2) 498
/lithium 329, 498
/methotrexate 499
hriamterene 497
Dicoumarol and other
coumarins/tolbutamide 416

642

INDEX

Dicoumarol/oral contraceptive 444
/phenytoin 189
kolbutamide 191
Diethylhexylphthalate (DEHP)/PVC 50
Diethylpropion/guanethidine 164
Diflunisal/indomethacin 500
/nicoumalone 502
/probenecid 501
/warfarin 184, 502
Digitalis glycosides/suxamethonium 531
Digitalis preparationslpropranolol 148, 149
Digitoxin/phenobarbitone 124
/phenytoin 124
lquinidine 122, 140
[rifampicin 123, 124. 394
Digitoxin/spironolactone 126, 226
Digoxidamiodarone 32, 34
/calcium antagonists 34
Idiltiazem 125, 160
/diuretic, thiazide or loop 229
/diuretics, thiazides 227
/erythromycin 122, 123, 383
iethacrynic acid 126
/felodipine 160
/flecainide 120
/frusemide 126
/ginseng 541
hydrochlorothiazide 227
hydroxychloroquine 124
/itraconazole 124
/Kyushin (containing venom of Bufo bufo
gargaritans) 543
/magnesium trisilicate 98
hefloquine 124, 125
Imefruside 126
heomycin 123, 374
/nicardipine 125, 160
hifedipine 125
/omeprazole 86
/propafenone 120, 137
Iquinidine 33, 34, 120-122, 124, 139, 140
lrifampicin 123, 394
/spironolactone 32
/spironolactone/potassium-sparing diuretics 34
isucralfate 94, 95, 141
/sulphasalazine 106
/tetracyclines 122, 123, 124, 383. 391
/thiazides and other potassiudlosing
diuretics 126, 222
hriamterene 229
/trimethoprim 124, 393
/verapamil/other calcium antagonists 33, 34,
125, 126, 142
Digoxin determination/spironolactone 226
Diltiazemhnipramine 310
/lithium 161, 326
/phenobarbitone 349
/phenytoin 159
/rifampicin 159, 394

Diltiazem (con@)
ltheophylline 161
Diphenhydrmine/debrisoquine test for genetic
polymorphism 270
Diphenylhydramine/temazepam 271
Diphylline/probenecid 34
Dipyridamole/fludarabine 475
Dirithromycin/ethinyl oestradiol 588
Disopyramide/antibacterials 130
/anticonvulsants 131
/diuretics 131
/erythromycin 130, 382
/flecainide 130
haloperidol 131
lphenobarbitone 131
lphenothiazines 131
lphenytoin 345
/pimozide 131
/primidone 131
lprocainamide 130, 135
lpropranolol 149
/quinidine 130
hfampicin 130, 131
lsotalol 130
herfenadine 131
Disopytamidelphenytoin 131
Disulfiradimidazoles 381
Iperphenazine 290
/phenytoin 341
ltheophylline 254
/warfarin ( S isomer) 195
Diuretichydralazine 172
/lithium 220
/meloxicam 593
Imexiletine 134
/NSAID 220, 221, 224, 497
/oral contraceptive 447
/quinidine 140, 141
/selective betaz/sympathomimetic 242
lterfenadine 271
/theophylline 254
Diuretic, loopllithium 34
/NSAIDs 55, 228
/piroxicam 497
hancomycin 374
Diuretic, thiazidelgallamine 529
/lithium 34, 220-222, 227-229, 328, 329
/NSAIDs 228
/piroxicam 497
lquinidine 140
/skeletal muscle relaxant 228
/sotalol 152
/tubocurarine 529
/uricosuric drugs 228
Divalent cations (especially Fe)lmithramycin 474
Divalent or trivalent metals/tetracyclines 3
Dopamine antagonists/risperidone 593
Doxorubicitdmercaptopurine 477
Doxycycline/phenobarbitone 349, 391

INDEX

Doxycycline (contd)
/phenytoin 346, 391
Drugkontainer packaging 46
/drug incompatibility 44-46
/plastic contact lens materials 51
/plastics materials 47
Ecothiopate eye drops/suxamethonium 531
Ecothiopate/procaine 520
Edrophonium/quinidine 140
EnalapriMithium 325, 326
/spironolactone 225, 226
Encainide/fluoxetine 13
/fluvoxamine 313
Enoxacin/nicoumalone 387
/ranitidine 387
/theophylline 250
/warfarin 387
Enprofyllinelprobenecid 34
Ephedrine/guanethidine 164, 165
/theophylline 256
Eprosartan/glyburide 589
Ergot alkaloids/propranolol 152
/sympathomimetic 242
Ergotaminelerythromycin 383
Erythromycin/loratidine 272
/lovastatin 214
/midazolam 383
/phenytoin 340, 382
/quinidine 138
herfenadine 270-272, 592
/theophylline 249, 383
/warfarin 187
Ethacrynic acid/ototoxic drugs 222
/skeletal muscle relaxants 228
/warfarin 195, 219
Ethoglucidlplastics materials 479
Ethosuximide/isoniazid 396
/oral contraceptive 443
Ethylbiscoumacetate/tienilic acid
(withdrawn) 219
Etinidine/theophylline 91
Famotidineln-acetylprocainamide 34
/probenecid 34
Iprocainamidelacetylprocainamide 33
Felbamate/phenobarbitone 356, 357
/phenytoin 356
/sodium valproate 356
Felodipine/grapefruit juice 160, 161, 541
/phenobarbitone 159, 349
/phenytoin 159
/primidone 159
/theophylline 254
Fenfluramine/hydrochlorothiazide227
Fenoterol/theophylline 256
Feprazone/warfarin 502

643

Flecainide/fluoxetine 313
/fluvoxamine 313
/procainamide 135
iverapamil 159
Floxacin/theophylline 251
Fluconazole/midazolam 590, 591
/oral contraceptive 443
[phenytoin 187, 341
herfenadhe 272, 273
itheophylline 253
kolbutamide 187, 417
/warfarin 187
Flucytosine/nicoumalone 398
/phenytoin 399
hifampicin 399
/theophylline 399
/warfarin 398
Fludarabineipentostatin 475, 476
Fluoroquinolone antibacterialdsucralfate 94
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics/theophylline 250, 251
Fluorouracil/metronidazole 381
Fluoxetine (or other SSRI)/selegiline 314
Fluoxetine/haloperidol 288
/lithium 314, 324
Imephentoin 348
/phenytoin 312. 314
/propranolol 314
kelegiline 369
iterfenadine 272
/tryptophan 315
/warfarin 315
Flupenthixol/guanethidine 316
/lithium 327
Fluphenazine decanoatehmipramine 287
/lithium 327
Flurbiprofenifrusemide 224
/nicoumalone 502
Fluvoxamine/lithium 314, 324
/phenytoin 313
/propranolol 150
lterfenadine 271
/theophylline 314, 252
Folate/sulphasalazine 106
Folic acid (metabolism)/oral contraceptives 448
Folic acid, bioassayltriamterene 229
Food/griseofulvin 41
iitraconazole 41
imetoprolol 39
/nitrofurantoin 41
/propranolol 39
Foods containing vitamin Woral
anticoagulants 546
Foods with high tyramine content/isoniazid 395
Foods, fattylgriseofulvin 400
Foscarnet/pentamidine 400
Frusemide (furosemide)/gentamicin 223, 224
hndomethacin 228
/metolazone 225
/mihinone 114

644

INDEX

Frusemide (furosemide) (conzd)
/phenytoin 224
/prednisolone (with and without potassiumsupplement) 55
Iprobenecid 34, 224
lsulphonylurea antidiabetics 219, 220
/theophylline 224, 225
Itubocurarine and non-depolarizing muscle
relaxants 224
/tubocurarine and non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blockers 529
Ganciclovir/imipenem with cilastatin 401
Iprobenecid 401
/zidovudine 401
Garlic (Allium sativum)lwarfarin 540
Gastrointestinal agentdwarfarin 179
GemfibroziVlovastatin 214
/warfarin 213
Gentamicinlheparin 374
/ticarcillin 375
Ginseng (Panax ginseng)/phenelzine 541
Glibenclamide/guar gum 542
lmetolazone 225
/rifampicin 58
lverapamil 142
/warfarin 191, 416
Glipizide/co-trimoxazole 415
/heparin 204, 417
Glucagon/insulin 424
Glyceryl trinitrate/medicinal plastics (PVC) 555
Iprazosin 169
Glycyrrhizin/prednisolone 544
Grapefruit juice/midazolam 542
Inifedipine 160, 161, 541, 542
lnisoldipine 541
Initrendipine 160, 541
Iquinidine 542
{terfenadine 273, 274, 592
Griseofulvinlnicoumalone 399
/oral contraceptives 400, 443
/phenobarbitone 349, 399
Iphenytoin 399
/warfarin 399
Guanethidine/haloperidol 289
hypotensive agent 289
/insulin 163
/levodopa 366
/mephentermine 164
/metformin 163
lmethylphenidate 164
Inoradrenaline 164
/oral contraceptives 164, 447
lphenothiazines 162, 164, 289
/phenylephrine 164
lsympathomimetic amine 164, 165
khiothixene 289
/tolbutamide 163

Guar gumlmetformin 542
/phenoxymethylpenicillin 386, 542

Halofantrine/procainamide 135
lterfenadine 271
Haloperidollimipramine 286
/lithium 291, 292, 327
hortriptyline 286
/quinidine 139
lrifampicin 394
lsparteine (from Cystisus coparius) 545
Halothaneltheophylline 248
Heparidnetilmicin 374
lprotamine sulphate 204
/streptokinase 204, 205
ltobramycin 374
High vitamin K content fooddwarfark 179
HMG CoA reductase inhibitor/nicoumalone 214
/warfarin 214
Hormone replacement
therapyiphenobarbitone 350
Hydralazine/beta-blocker 172
llevodopa 172
/NSAIDs 172
/oral contraceptives (combined) 172
Hydrochlorothiazide/trimethoprim 221
Hydrocortisone (cortisol)/oral contraceptive 447
hifampicin 432
/theophylline 256
Hydrogel intraocular lenseslvarious drugs
(list) 559, 560
Ibuprofenlinterleukin-2 479
/lithium 329
/methotrexate 34
/phenytoin 501
/propranolol 152
Ifosfamide/warfarin 472
Imidazole antifungals/rifampicin 394
herfenadhe 272, 381
Imidazoleslpancuronium 529
Imipraminelisoprenaline 240, 311
lketoconazole 589, 590
/levodopa 310
lperphenazine 286
lphenelzine 303
lverapamil 310
Indole derivativeslstreptokinase 204
Indomethacinldiuretic, thiazide and loop 497
linterleukin-2 479
/lithium 329, 498
lmethotrexate 34, 498
loxprenolol 495
/phenylpropanolamine 496
lprazosin 169
lprobenecid 34
lpropranolol 152

INDEX

Indomethacin (contd)
/sodium injectionltolazoline hydrochloride 502
kriamterene 497
/warfarin 502
Influenza vaccine/phenytoin 510
/theophylline 259, 260, 511, 512
/warfarin 197, 512
Influenza virus infectiodtheophylline 512
Insulidglass and plastics 424
/maxepa 214
/metoprolo1 419
hifedipine 419
/oral contraceptive 422, 423, 446, 447
/polyethylene, PVC and glassware 555, 556
/ritodrine 243, 424
/smoking 423
Interferodwarfarin 198
Interferon dinsulin 510
hheophylline 254
/warfarin 512, 513
Interferon a:,,/warfarin 513
Interferon p/warfarin 513
Ipratropiudsalbutamol 243
Iron (oral)/magnesium trisilicate 98
Iron salts/quinolones 388
/tetracyclines 391
Iron/various herbal teas 545, 546
Isoniazid/ketoconazole 381
/levodopa 367
Iphenytoin 340, 396
/theophylline 249, 250, 396
Isosorbide dinitrate plus heparin/PVC tubing 556
Isosorbide dinitrateiPVC infusion sets 556
Ispaghula husk/lithium 329, 540
Isradipine/phenobarbitone 159, 349
/phenytoin 159
/primidone 159
Itraconazole/midazolam 381
/omeprazole 381
/oral contraceptive 443
hcralfate 381
lterfenadine 270-272, 382, 592
IUDs/meloxicam 593
Kanamycin/skeletal muscle relaxant 375
Ketamine/theophylline 248
Ketoconazole/liquorice derivative 96
/loratidhe 272
/omeprazole 381
/oral contraceptive 443
/phenobarbitone 381
/phenytoin 341, 381
lpropafenone 137
/phenytoin 381
Irifampicin 381
Isucralfate 94
herfenadhe 270-272, 382, 591
/tolbutamide 417

645

Ketoprofen/lithium 329
hethotrexate 34, 499, 500
/warfarin 502
L-asparginase/vinca alkaloid 474, 475
L-dopalpyridoxine 40
Lamotrigine/phenobarbitone 356
/phenytoin 356
/primidone 356
/sodium valproate 356
/sodium valproate (in children) 590
Latamoxeflnicoumalone 376
/warfarin 376
Laxatives, bulk/lithium 329
Levodopa/lorazepam 367
lmethyldopa 167, 366
iphenothiazines 291, 367368
lpropranolol 366, 367
/pyridoxine (vitamin B6) 367
/reserpine 366
hisperidone 593
/selegiline 368
hhioxanthenes 291, 367, 368
Lignocaine/metoprolol 519
/mexilethe 134
hadolo1 519
/nitrates 133
/prenylamine 133
/prenylamine with nitrates 519
/procainamide 135
/propranolol 132, 149, 519, 520
/PVC containers 521
/smoking 133, 521
isuxamethonium 521
Lipid lowering agent, fibrate type/pravastatin 214
/simvastatin 214
Liquorice derivativelmexiletine 96
/ofloxacin 96
/pivampicillin 96
/quinidine 96
/rifampicin 96
itetraconazole 96
/tetracyclines 96
Liquorice derivtive/flecainide 96
Lithium/mazindol 330
/meloxicam 593
imethyldopa 167, 326
imetronidazole 322, 323, 381
haproxen 329
heostigmine 328
heuroleptic 327, 328
/NSAIDs 34, 329
/pancuronium 329, 330, 529
iphenobarbitone 325
/phenothiazines 291, 292
/phenylbutazone 329
/phenytoin 325
lpiroxicam 329

646

INDEX

Lithium (contd)
/pyridostigmine 328
/sodium bicarbonate 98, 322
/spectinomycin 323
isuxamethonium 329, 531
/tetracyclines 323, 391
ltheophylline 34, 254
lthioridazine 327
/tranylcypromine 324
/triamterene 221, 229
/tryptophan 324, 325
ltubocurarine 329
Iverapamil 161, 326
Local anaesthetic with
noradrenaline/antidepressant, tricyclic 241
Lomustine/theophylline 255, 472, 473
Lorazepadmedicinal plastics 554, 555
Lovastatin/nicotinic acid 214
/warfarin 214
Lovastidpectin or bran 540
Macrolide antibioticlnicoumalone 382
/warfarin 382
herfenadhe 272, 382
Magnesium saltdnon-depolarizing neuromuscular
blockers 530
/tubocurarine 530
Magnesium trisilicate/nitrofurantoin 384
Mannitol, lactose and corn starcNpyridoxine 52
Maxepa/oral hypoglycaemic 214
Mazindohethyldopa 167
Meclofenamate/warfarin 503
Medicinal plastics/various drugs in solution
(list) 558, 559
Mefenamic acid/warfarin 503
Mefloquine hydrochloride/plastic membrane
filter 553
Mefloquineloral typhoid vaccine 509
Mefloquine/sotalol 151
Meloxicam/methotrexate 593
NSAIDs 593
/thrombolytics 593
Melphaladnalidixic acid 473
Mephentoinlparoxetine 348
Isertraline 348
Mercaptopurine/warfarin 477
Metformin/phenprocoumon 416
Methadone/phenytoin 346
/rifampicin 393
Methotrexateh-xylose 477
lnaproxen 34, 499, 500
/NSAIDs (propionic acidhype) 477
NSAIDs 34, 498, 500
/penicillins 34, 385
lphenytoin 477
Iprobenecid 34, 477
/pyrimethamine 393
/salicylates 24, 498

Methotrexate (contd)
/smallpox vaccine 477
/smallpox vaccine plus corticosteroids 477
/sulphinpyrazone 477
/sulphonamides 389, 477
/tetracycline 477
/urinary alkalinizers 34
Methotrimeprazine/suxamethonium 293
ltubocurarine 293
MethoxsalenlPicrorhiza kurroa 544
Methoxyfluranelrubber and plastics 47
Methyl salicylate ointmentlwarfarin 199
Methyldopahitrates 167
/NSAIDs 166
/oral contraceptives 167, 477
/phenothiazines 168, 289
/propranolol 168
Methyldopa stimulated prolactin secretionloral
contraceptive 449
Methyldopa with
oxprenolol/phenylpropanolamine 168
Metirosine/tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitors 169
Metoclopramide/pergolide 370
lphenothiazine 292
/suxamethonium 532
Metoprolol/oral contraceptives 447
/propafenone 137
hifampicin 149, 150
/theophylline 253
herapamil 142
Metronidazoleinicoumalone 380
/pancuronium 529
/phenobarbitone 349, 380
/phenytoin 340. 380
/sucralfate 381
/warfarin (S isomer) 188, 380
Mexiletine/phenytoin 133, 134, 346
Iprocainamide 134
lrifampicin 133
/theophylline 134, 249
Mianserin/phenobarbitone 349
Miconazole gellnicoumalone 592
lphenindione 592
/warfarin 592
Milk and dairy products (Ca)/quinolones 388
/tetracyclines 391
Milk/tetracycline 12
Mitomycin C/vinca alkaloid 475
Mitotane/spironolatone 226
Moclobemide/sparteine (from Cystisus
coparius) 545
Morphine/oral contaceptive 449
Mustine/suxamethonium 531

N-acetylprocainamide/ranitidine 34
Nalidixic acid/nicoumalone 387
lnitrofurantoin 384, 388
lprobenecid 388

INDEX

Nalidixic acid (conid)
/quinolone antimicrobials 384
/warfarin 188, 189, 387
Narcotic analgesicsinon-depolarizing
neuromuscular blockers 530
/phenothiazines 285
Neomycin/oral contraceptives 375
/penicillin G 375
/penicillin V 375
/phenoxymethylpenicillin 386
/skeletal muscle relaxant 375
Neostigmine/quinidine 140
Nicardipine/phenobarbitone 159. 349
Iphenytoin 159
/primidone 159
Nicotinehanitidine 33
Nicoumalone/ofloxacin 387
/phenobarbitone 349
/propafenone 136
/quinidine 138
/rifampicin 393
/sulphonamide 389
/tiaprofenic acid 503
/tienilk acid (withdrawn) 219
Itrimethoprim 392
/vitamin K rich food (Gon) 195
Nifedipinehon-depolarizing neuromuscular
blocker 528
/oral hypoglycaemic agents 419, 420
/phenobarbitone 159, 349
Iphenytoin 159
/primidone 159
/quinidine 139, 159
/rifampicin 159, 394
/theophylline 254
Itubocurarine 161
Nitrazepam/oral contraceptive 449
Nitrofurantoin/oal contraceptives 384
/phenytoin 340, 384
/probenecid 384
/quinolones 388
/uricosurics 364
Non-depolarizing neuromuscular
blocker/quinidine 528
Iverapamil 528
Norfloxaciltheophylline 251
Nortriptyline/perphenazine 286
NSAID/nicoumalone and warfarin 502. 503
/NSAID 500
/propranolol 152
Iquinolones 387, 501
/thyroid function tests 496
/triamterene 229
/warfarin 179
Nystatkdriboflavine 400
Oestrogens/phenobarbitone 350
/phenytoin 347

647

Ofloxacin/warfarin 387
Omeprazole/phenytoin 86
/warfarin 86, 200
Oral contraceptive/imipramine/stimulated
prolactin secretion 449
/nicoumalone 444
/paracetam01 449
/pethidine (meperidine) 448
/phenobarbitone 350
iphenothiazine 293
Iphenothiazine stimulated prolactin
secretion 448
/phenprocoumon 199, 444
/phenytoin 341, 347, 357
Iphenytoin, phenobarbitone or primidone 443
/reserpine stimulated prolactin secretion 448
hifampicin 394, 443
/salicylate 449
/temazepam 449
/tetracycline 443
/theophylline 449
/vitamin BI2 448
Oral typhoid vaccine/sulphonamides SOY
Orciprenaline (metaproterenol)/theophylline 256,
257
Oriental Kampo medicines/prednisolone 542, 543
Oxacillin/phenytoin 340
Oxyphenbutazone/warfarin 502

Paraldehyde/rubber and plastics 47
/rubber, polystyrene and styrene
acrylonitrile 47
Paroxetine/phenytoin 313
Penicillin/probenecid 34, 386
/tetracycline 391
Perfloxacin/theophylline 251
Persona contraceptive system/tetracycline 591
Pethidine (meperidine)/procarbazine 480
Iphenytoin 347
lselegiline 369
Phenelzine/suxamethonium 301, 532
Phenformin/tetracycline 391. 416
Phenobarbitone with rifampicin/verapamil 344
Phenobarbitone/phenytoin 343. 355
/quinidine 139
Irifampicin 394
/sodium valproate 348
/theophylline 252, 350
/thyroxine 350
ivalproic acid 355
iverapamil 349
/vitamin D 350
/warfarin 349
Phenothiazine derivatives/procarbazine 480
Phenothiazine/plastic intravenous delivery
systems 293
lprobucol 213
iquinidine 139

648

INDEX

Phenothiazine (confdj
/suxamethonium 293
Phenylbutazonelphenytoin 501
/thyroxine 55
/warfarin 3, 21, 22, 24, 5 5 , 502
Phenytoin/drugs decreasing effects (table) 342344
/drugs enhancing (table) 338
/drugs modifying actions (table) 344, 345
/plastic nasogastric feeding tubes 552
/prednisone 345
/premarin (conjugated oestrogen) 347
/primidone 347, 348
/prochlorperazine 285, 286
/quinidine 139
/rifampicin 340, 357, 394
hifampicin with isoniazid and ethambutol 358
hifampicin with other antitubercular drugs 358
lsalicylates 339
Bhankapusph syrup 545
/sodium valproate 343, 344, 348
/sucralfate 94
/sulphonamides 340, 389
/tetracyclines 351
ltheophylline 252. 253, 348, 349
/thioridazine 286, 341, 342
/trimethoprim 392, 393
lvalproate 24
herapamil 344
higabatrin 356
/vinca alkaloid 474
/zidovudine 401
Pipemidic/theophylline acid 251
Piperinela number of orthodox drugs (list) 544
PirbuteroYtheophylline 256
Piroxicam/warfarin 186, 503
Plastic membrane filterlquinine sulphate 553
Polyacrylonitrile (AN69) dialysis
membranehamipril 560
Pravastatin/thyroxine 214
Prednisolone/rifampicin 432
hifarnpicin with isoniazid 432
Primazide/quinidine 139
Primidone/quinidine 139
/sodium valproate 348
/theophylline 252
Probenecid/allopurinol 34
/pyrazinamide 397
lquinolones 34
/sulphinpyrazone 34
/zidovudine 34
Procainamide/ace tylprocainamidetrimethoprim 33, 34
/propranolol 149
/quinidine 135
/skeletal muscle relaxants 136
/sotalol 135
/sulphonamides 135
lterfenadine 135

Procainamide (conzd)
himethoprim 135, 392
Procaine/sulphonamide 519
/suxamethonium 521, 522
Procarbazine/sympathomimetic amines 480
Ityramine containing foods 480
Proguanil/warfarin 191, 192
Propafenone/neostigmine 137
/propranolol 137
/pyridostigmine 137
/quinidine 136
hfampicin 136
/terfenadine 137
/theophylline 137, 249
/warfarin 136
PropofoWVC tubing 557
PropranoloYquinidine 141
/skeletal muscle relaxants 152
/theophylline 263
/thyroxine 151, 152
lverapamil 55
PVClquinidine gluconate 557
/vitamin A acetate 557, 558
Pyrazolone/streptokinase 204
Pyrimethamine/trimethoprim 393

Quinidine measurementdtriamterene 229
Quinidine/rifampicin 138
/skeletal muscle relaxants 141
/sparteine (from Cystisus coparius) 545
hcralfate 141
Iterfenadine 139
/timolol eye drops 141
ltubocurarine 141, 528
herapamil 139, 159
/warfarin 138
Quinine/rifampicin 395
Quinolones/sucralfate 387
/theophylline 388

Ranitidinehiamterene 33, 34
Itriamterene 33, 34
Reproterol/theophylline 256
Reserpine/yohimbine (from Pausinystalia
yohimbine) 546
Retinoids/tetracyclines 392
Rifampicin/ethambutol-sulphasalazine106
/theophylline 251, 395
/thyroxine 395
herapamil 142, 143, 159, 394
/warfarin 393
Ritodrine/theophylline 256

Salbutamol (albuterol)/theophylline 256, 257
Salicylates/streptokinase 204

INDEX

Salmeterolltheophylline 256
Selective beta&ympathomimetic/
theophylline 243, 244
Simethicone/warfarin 200
Simvastatidthyroxine 214
Skeletal muscle relaxantlthiotepa 473
/streptomycin 375
kobramycin 375
/viomycin 375
Smoking/theophylline 255
SotaloUterfenadine 151, 271
Spironolactone/warfarin 219, 226, 227
Streptokinaseltraxenamic acid 205
Sucralfateltetracyclines 94, 390
/thyroxine 95
Sulindac/warfarin 186, 503
Sulphafurazole/warfarin 189
Sulphamethoxazolelwarfarin 24
Sulphinpyrazoneltheophylline 259
Itolbutamide 423, 424
/warfarin 24
/warfarin (S isomer) 200, 201
Sulphonamidelthiopentone 389
Itolbutamide 14, 21, 389
/warfarin 389
Suxamethonium or other depolarizing
neuromusular blocker/thiotepa 473
Suxamethonium/thiotepa 531
/tretamine 531
Itrimetaphan 170

Sympathomimetic aminesltheophylline 226
ltrimetaphan 170
Tamoxifen/warfarin 201, 481
Terbutaline/theophylline 256, 257
Terfenadine/grapefruit juice 542
/troleandomycin 272
Tetracycline/theophylline 251
Theophylline/thiabendazole 248, 249
/tocainide 249
/triacetyloleandomycin 383
ltroleandomycin 251, 252
/tulobuterol 256
/ulcer healing agents 257, 258
herapamil 254
/viloxazine 252
Thyroid and parathyroid function
testsitriamterene 229
Thyroid replacement therapy 201, 202
Tienilic acid (withdrawn)/warfarin 219
Tolmetidwarfarin 503
Trimethoprim/rifampicin 393
/warfarin 192, 392
/zidovudine 33, 34
Tripelennamine/diphenhydraminewith
promethazine 274
Tubocurarinelverapamil 161
Vitamin K rich foodlwarfarin 195, 202

649

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

